[Amit Varma]: Among the few things I have learnt in my life, one is this, be selective about the things
[Amit Varma]: you get involved in. I am still some way off from mastering the fine art of being dispassionate,
[Amit Varma]: but more and more, when I watch the outrage erupt on social media, or the newest scandal
[Amit Varma]: on news television, I tell myself not to get involved, not to get all het up about it.
[Amit Varma]: My slogan to live by is a simple one, not my circus, not my monkeys. My power to change
[Amit Varma]: the world is limited, so why sweat what I cannot control. Now I would imagine that this
[Amit Varma]: is what many economists would think if they were actually asked to become a part of government
[Amit Varma]: and help run the economy, especially in India, known for its oppressive state, so resistant
[Amit Varma]: to change, and its venal toxic politics. Why get involved? Stay away and pontificate from
[Amit Varma]: a mile-high view. My guest on the show today is a well-known economist who was asked six
[Amit Varma]: years ago to join our central government as the chief economic advisor. He might well
[Amit Varma]: have refused the offer, thinking, not my circus, not my monkeys. But he did not. He joined
[Amit Varma]: the circus.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioural
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My title for this episode is, What a Long Strange Trip
[Amit Varma]: It's Been. And I'm actually referring to two trips here. One is that of the Indian economy
[Amit Varma]: through 70 years, a complex monster passing through complicated times, starting small
[Amit Varma]: and ending troubled. The second journey is that of my guest Arvind Subramanian, who joined
[Amit Varma]: Arindra Modi's government in 2014 as chief economic advisor, excited about having the
[Amit Varma]: chance to do work that could have an impact on the lives of millions. He held that post
[Amit Varma]: for four years and continues to speak out today as a public intellectual. I was delighted
[Amit Varma]: when he agreed to come on the show to speak about both India's journey in the last 73
[Amit Varma]: years and his own in the four years he spent in government. I have been a constant critic
[Amit Varma]: of this government's economic policies and did not refrain from asking hard questions.
[Amit Varma]: Arvind, showing tremendous grace and patience, gave me forthright answers for more than three
[Amit Varma]: hours. I'm sure even his former boss, Arun Jaitley, never grilled him for so long. No,
[Amit Varma]: but seriously, this was one of those digressive conversations that I really enjoyed spending
[Amit Varma]: as much time on large meta questions as on policy nitty-gritties. Do note one thing,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, due to a technical glitch, there was some minor sound disturbances in the recording,
[Amit Varma]: which we have tried to cover up in the edit. I'm sure you'll get lost in the engrossing
[Amit Varma]: flow of ideas and not even notice. Before we begin our conversation, though, let's take
[Amit Varma]: a quick commercial break. Are you one of those people who not only loves to read, but also
[Amit Varma]: wants to write better? If so, I have something for you. Since April this year, I've been
[Amit Varma]: teaching an online course called The Art of Clear Writing. Four webinars spread out over
[Amit Varma]: four Saturdays, in which I share whatever I've learnt about the craft and practice of
[Amit Varma]: writing over 25 years as a professional writer. The course also contains many writing exercises,
[Amit Varma]: discussions on email and WhatsApp, and much interactivity. It costs rupees 10,000 or $150.
[Amit Varma]: You can check out the details at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. This link will be in
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. If you want to bridge the gap between the thoughts in your head and
[Amit Varma]: the words on the page, then the art of clear writing might be just what you need. September
[Amit Varma]: batches begin on Saturday, September 5th. So hurry and register before then. IndiaUncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. Arvind, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit. It's great to be on the show. You know, before we start talking about your
[Amit Varma]: exciting career and various aspects of that are so interesting to me, both your time as
[Amit Varma]: an economist and your time working as you know, in the government to actually bring
[Amit Varma]: about change. I want to talk a little bit about your sort of personal growth, because
[Amit Varma]: I was sort of looking at your CV. And I found it very interesting in the sense that I assumed
[Amit Varma]: that, oh, you know, you must have taken the typical economist path where you've kind of
[Amit Varma]: gone abroad and done a PhD and all of that. But you actually, you know, you did an MBA
[Amit Varma]: from IIM Ahmedabad. And what I can see from all your public readings and speeches is that
[Amit Varma]: unlike the, you know, most economists have this almost as dry reputation and of not being
[Amit Varma]: interested in other things and always, you know, engrossed in numbers, but you actually
[Amit Varma]: given a lecture on, you know, the what economists can learn from literature, you are the only
[Amit Varma]: person I can think of who can quote both Keats and Keynes. So tell me a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: your time growing up your formative influences and you know, what your personal journey was
[Guest]: like.
[Guest]: Right. You know, it's a bit always a little bit awkward to talk about oneself, of course.
[Guest]: But I mean, let me just begin by saying that, when I said it's great to be on the podcast,
[Guest]: I should have added that it's almost now a mark of you only arrive as a public intellectual
[Guest]: in India, when you've been on Amit Verma's podcast, I think this is a certification.
[Guest]: So thanks for having me on the show. Yes. So in terms of, you know, growing up in a
[Guest]: very kind of pretty conventional middle, upper middle class household, my father was in the
[Guest]: government, he was in the Audit and Account Service. And he was a very unusual civil servant,
[Guest]: you know, he was posted in the most godforsaken places, where everyone would try and want
[Guest]: to be in Delhi, whatever he would, you know, we spent five years in Dandekarania, you know,
[Guest]: in Nagaland, Shillong, you know, Ajmer, Udaipur, so I've, you know, traveled all over with
[Guest]: him. And then I, you know, and of course, he was also a painter and a writer. And and
[Guest]: so, so so the growing up the household was full of books and things. And, and what I
[Guest]: remember, of course, is that, even when I was growing up, you know, this was what in
[Guest]: the 60s, my father used to subscribe to, you know, Time, Newsweek, Life, all these things
[Guest]: would physically come to the household. So, you know, just almost by osmosis, not that,
[Guest]: you know, I was particularly studious or anything, but just by osmosis, you know, I could pick
[Guest]: it up. And, you know, I have to say that, so just to give a give an example of, you
[Guest]: know, things that we pick up that we forget that we've picked up unconsciously. So one
[Guest]: of my, you know, all time favorite pieces on foreign aid, which I teach in class, is
[Guest]: by this New Yorker writer called Philip Gurevich. He also has a great book on Rwanda on the
[Guest]: Rwanda genocide. And, you know, in the early part of the book, he describes the first foreign
[Guest]: aid intervention, which is on one of the early foreign aid interventions, which was, you
[Guest]: know, what happened in Nigeria and Biafra. And he has a line describing, you know, the
[Guest]: famine that happened. And he describes, you know, children with, you know, the victims
[Guest]: of the famine as stick limbed, balloon bellied, ancient eyed. And, you know, I was just blown
[Guest]: by that description. But then I remember that the reason why it, you know, it evoked so
[Guest]: much in me was because I remember these pictures in Life magazine of the Biafra crisis and
[Guest]: that picture of the of the boy or the child, actually, with the distended belly and so
[Guest]: on. So I mean, this is just an aside growing up. So then I finished my at about the age
[Guest]: of 13. You know, my elder brother was was a voracious reader, but I was not. But at
[Guest]: the age of 13 or 14, suddenly I realized that, you know, wow, that's this whole world of
[Guest]: books out there, which I've not at all explored. So almost as a conscious act of catching up
[Guest]: on lost time, I would ask my brother to give me a list of, you know, 10, 15 books every
[Guest]: time he would come. He was in college and I was still in school. So, you know, I started
[Guest]: reading quite voraciously then. And then, of course, you know, finished my schooling
[Guest]: from Chennai and went to Delhi to do an undergraduate degree in economics. I think it was fairly
[Guest]: unremarkable. I think I think what was great about that period was we picked up almost
[Guest]: everything from our peers. So it was really a great, you know, my love of Hindustani music,
[Guest]: you know, a love of, you know, sports literature, reading and all of that was intensified in
[Guest]: now. Of course, growing up, you always listen to Carnatic music at home. But my love of
[Guest]: Hindustani music came up in college. Then, of course, you know, at that point, you either
[Guest]: go to Delhi school or you go to, you know, do an MBA at that point. Those are the kind
[Guest]: of standard options. And I had always wanted to, I think, join, I think, the government.
[Guest]: In fact, I think I wanted to join the Foreign Service then, I think. So I did my MBA. And
[Guest]: in my second year, I wrote the civil service exam and I failed. I mean, I mean, I wasn't
[Guest]: high enough to get either the IFS or the IAS. And then, of course, I guess it's a sign of
[Guest]: the elite networks that we were part of that I got this scholarship. I'm not sure I deserved
[Guest]: it entirely, but I got the scholarship to go to England. So after my MBA, I worked for
[Guest]: a brief period, three months with the Tata. They had the Tata Administrative Service,
[Guest]: which was like the private sector equivalent of the IAS. But then they gave me leave actually
[Guest]: to go abroad. And I went to Oxford to do, in fact, I went to do an MPhil in management
[Guest]: studies because that's what I'd done in MBA, but I quickly switched to economics. And I
[Guest]: think I had, again, a fairly unremarkable MPhil in PhD. I was still kind of unsure of
[Guest]: what I wanted to do, you know, not completely confident that, you know, I had actually acquired
[Guest]: because, you see, an Oxford PhD, unlike an American PhD, you know, it was completely,
[Guest]: you know, open ended, you kind of did what you wanted. And today, for example, I mean,
[Guest]: it's a dirty secret, you know, almost all my academic papers are empirical papers, but
[Guest]: I have not done one course in econometrics all my life, you know, even though I'm a PhD
[Guest]: in economics. So, you know, you could do that in if you went to England in those days. So
[Guest]: I felt and then when I finished my MPhil, I did get an academic job. And the truth is,
[Guest]: I felt that mediocrity shows up so clearly in academics, and feeling that I was an imposter
[Guest]: and mediocre, I kind of ran away from academics as it were. And then I went to work for international
[Guest]: institutions. And then I my first job was at in the GATT actually, at the time that
[Guest]: the Uruguay round was being negotiated. I still remember, I was at the GATT, I was,
[Guest]: you know, a young, very young, lowly officer. And I was assigned to be part of the intellectual
[Guest]: property negotiations trips, you know, I don't know how many of you remember, but the the
[Guest]: Uruguay round, the most contentious issue for India and for many developing countries
[Guest]: was patent protection, and intellectual property. And, you know, at that stage, so while working,
[Guest]: I did some, you know, fairly, not very sophisticated empirical research, showing that, you know,
[Guest]: this trips agreement would be harmful for countries like India. And I even kind of roughly
[Guest]: crudely quantified that. And I guess my early kind of moment of epiphany then was, this
[Guest]: was not even kind of probably wouldn't have even been published in any academic journal.
[Guest]: But I do remember, you know, when and those negotiations, by the way, were, were really
[Guest]: contentious. I mean, I don't know how many of you recall that it was almost touch and
[Guest]: go India was almost considering not signing on to it, because, because of the intellectual
[Guest]: property things, because, you know, pharmaceutical prices would go up, access to medicine would
[Guest]: come down. So I remember, and I, you know, did this work. So I remember my moment of
[Guest]: kind of, you know, kind of epiphany, but also kind of sense of wonder of, you know, what
[Guest]: the life of a policy economist could be. You know, I was working there and one of the Indian
[Guest]: officials one day, this was, I think, 90, maybe three or 94. I don't know when it was.
[Guest]: He came and he was a senior person, senior civil servant in the Indian government, who
[Guest]: used to work in the commerce ministry. He came and said, Arvind, I have to tell you,
[Guest]: you know, last week or a month ago, Carla Hills, who was the US trade negotiator, very
[Guest]: tough lady, she was called Carla Crowbar Hills, because she wanted to price open markets in
[Guest]: developing countries. And so what had happened was, when I wrote this, I think Montague was
[Guest]: the Commerce Secretary at that point. So this official had passed it on to Montague and
[Guest]: apparently, and Chidambaram was the Commerce Minister, and he had passed it on to Chidambaram.
[Guest]: So this person came to me and said, Carla Hills came and met Mr. Chidambaram to say
[Guest]: that, why are you Indians fussing over this intellectual property negotiations? You know,
[Guest]: it's going to be win-win for all of us, it's good for India, etc. And then she said, look,
[Guest]: I have a bunch of 10 studies to show that this is the case. And apparently, I don't
[Guest]: know, of course, it was later confirmed, apparently, Mr. Chidambaram, the minister said, well,
[Guest]: Ambassador Hills, I have another study which shows exactly the opposite. And he presented
[Guest]: her my paper. And so that was a kind of wow moment for me that, you know, one could do
[Guest]: policy research and have it taken seriously by policymakers. So that was a kind of quite
[Guest]: a heady moment of, you know, and I was very young then. And then after that, of course,
[Guest]: I went to work for the IMF. And, you know, again, fairly unremarkable career. But then,
[Guest]: I mean, basically, my, my kind of academic life took off in around 2000, I think, I was
[Guest]: the, you know, for the IMF, I, you know, IMF, you go around, you know, to all the countries
[Guest]: in the world, I was the mission leader to Mauritius. And it's just a such an interesting
[Guest]: country, you know, for so many reasons, literature, history, you know, the Indian presence there.
[Guest]: And when I was in in Mauritius, I actually saw a festival that you only see in Chennai,
[Guest]: you know, very unusual festival in Chennai, which is related to the God Kartikeya. I saw
[Guest]: that actually, I saw that in Mauritius, you know, so it's kind of really a, I mean, just
[Guest]: to see how traditions kind of persist, you know, in distant places. So I was working
[Guest]: on Mauritius, fascinating country, there's a great Naipaul piece on Mauritius, you know,
[Guest]: of course, Joseph Conrad was in Mauritius, you know, of course, the Amitabh Ghosh trilogy
[Guest]: begins in at least part of it is in Mauritius. So I wrote a paper on Mauritius, basically
[Guest]: saying, how can you explain this, this miracle? And I sent it to, you know, Danny Roderick,
[Guest]: who was then a friend and a co author. And, you know, within kind of an hour of receiving
[Guest]: that he said, Arvind, I want this for my volume. And then, of course, then, then I became a
[Guest]: for about 10 years, I think I was doing hardcore economics research, but never situated in
[Guest]: academia, I was never, I was always, you know, then at the IMF. So Danny and I did a series
[Guest]: of research papers, then Raghu and I did a series of research papers that I did on my
[Guest]: own, a number of research papers, then I moved to this think tank in Washington, the Peterson
[Guest]: Institute for International Economics and the Center for Global Development. Because,
[Guest]: you know, my, my academic research is mostly on, you know, development and global and,
[Guest]: you know, the global economic system, and almost all of that. So I left the IMF partly
[Guest]: also, because, you know, people think that, in government, you have to be restrained in
[Guest]: your public utterances. And that was getting becoming true of the IMF as well, because
[Guest]: actually, Raghu and I wrote a series of papers on aid, then I wrote some pieces on Nigeria,
[Guest]: which I think senior management, they were having difficulty allowing it to be published.
[Guest]: So I left because I wanted to write publicly much more. And then, of course, I wrote a
[Guest]: book on China when I was in the Peterson Institute, which about the rise of China and so on. So
[Guest]: I got a bit into China as well. And then of course, this, you know, what is probably the
[Guest]: most exciting three years and nine months of my life was the, you know, being Chief
[Guest]: Economic Advisor, it was really a completely transformational experience for me in many,
[Guest]: many ways, you know, what you learn about politics, about politicians, about the policymaking
[Guest]: process, what you learn about oneself, you know, how you build teams. And of course,
[Guest]: the other thing is, you know, is how should one kind of behave as a public intellectual
[Guest]: in government, you know, what are the dilemmas that you face the, you know, the moral dilemmas
[Guest]: and things, you know, so many, so many unusual things happened when I was in government,
[Guest]: and so many choices had to be made. So so so and then, of course, now, I finished that
[Guest]: and left a year before my second contract was about to end. Because I felt that, you
[Guest]: know, I had personal reasons, but also, I felt that my usefulness, effectiveness was
[Guest]: kind of reaching their limits. And so I was working as at the Kennedy School was teaching
[Guest]: here. And now, of course, as of July one, I've joined Ashoka University. And so look
[Guest]: forward to, you know, probably the last phase of my career.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating life, you managed to summarize into so little space, I have a couple
[Amit Varma]: of follow up questions. And for one, I want to go a little bit back, because you know,
[Amit Varma]: as you were talking about your childhood and growing up and going across India, and I felt
[Amit Varma]: a little nostalgic, because even though I am like 15 years younger than you, I'm in
[Amit Varma]: my mid 40s. Now, it strikes me that I also did a significant part of my growing up. Before
[Amit Varma]: liberalization, I was also a privileged child, my father was a civil servant. So I would
[Amit Varma]: imagine that, you know, just thinking of all of the people growing up in similar circumstances,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in those times, certain kinds of music, which you end up listening to the certain
[Amit Varma]: kind of books, which you end up reading, you know, everything that you kind of mentioned
[Amit Varma]: about the magazines, and just sort of thinking about myself, I've often thought that what
[Amit Varma]: that upbringing did to me is that I grew into a sort of default view of the world that I
[Amit Varma]: had where you take the necessity of this of state paternalism for granted, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you have a certain approach to everything. And then later on, as you go through the years,
[Amit Varma]: the scales fall off your eyes now in and you see the world differently in subtle ways.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, this journey would be different for everybody. Now, it's interesting that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, at a certain point, you've done your MBA, you've completed that, and then
[Amit Varma]: you go abroad, and you spent, you know, most of your career abroad. So my first sort of
[Amit Varma]: question is that, were there moments where you felt that you could take a step back?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, there were some scales that fell off, and you could take a step back and
[Amit Varma]: something which had seemed one way to you, you know, seem different, like, would you
[Amit Varma]: say that there was a process like that? Or was there a period of time where you felt
[Amit Varma]: that you began to look at the world differently? And, you know, if so, what was the change
[Amit Varma]: like whether thinkers who influenced you and or books that you know, kind of changed or
[Guest]: shaped the way you looked at the world? Yeah, I don't think it would be accurate to say
[Guest]: that there was one, you know, point of, you know, one or two epiphanic moments, we'd say,
[Guest]: Oh, my God, whatever. So it was very much, I think, a gradual process. And as you said,
[Guest]: I think this whole, you know, the state is part of your state. And, you know, it's part
[Guest]: of your DNA growing up. I think the first thing kind of the intellectual changes, you
[Guest]: go out, and you see, wow, you know, all that the state has done wrong, you know, the liberties
[Guest]: it's taken away the, you know, the whole license control Raj and, you know, you kind of we
[Guest]: used to take, you know, 100 and 200% tariffs as kind of, you know, normal, right? And then
[Guest]: you go abroad and say, what, you know, 3%, 5% tariffs, and you know, what's going on
[Guest]: kind of thing. And of course, then you read, I read the old, you know, the wonderful Bhagwati
[Guest]: Desai Srinivasan literature, you know, you learn about that. And so I think that process
[Guest]: of seeing what we were doing wrong, I think it just hits you gradually over time. But
[Guest]: then, of course, I think, in some ways, you know, the journey in some ways gets completed,
[Guest]: because then you say, well, but yes, markets, yes, freedom, yes, liberalism. But, you know,
[Guest]: what about all the things that this, you know, the acts of omission that the state has committed,
[Guest]: you know, we know the sins of commission, then you come back and you say, well, what
[Guest]: about the sins of and so I think the last 10-15 years have been, I think, a lot about
[Guest]: understanding and, and reflecting on, you know, state and markets in India, you know,
[Guest]: what I call the whole stigmatized capitalism, how that's come about in a way that's detrimental
[Guest]: to both capital and states. And so I think that's been kind of the intellectual journey,
[Guest]: to some extent. And I remember, I think, in terms of intellectual influences, you know,
[Guest]: I was reading a lot. But in the academic literature, I think that, you know, I would almost say
[Guest]: that I learned kind of macroeconomics reading Paul Krugman's writings, actually, I would
[Guest]: actually read almost everything that he wrote early on here, some, you know, wonderful,
[Guest]: and just I think, just how to write clearly as an economist, I think, that's been a big
[Guest]: obsession of mine. It's not just, you know, obviously, the ideas matter a lot, but actually,
[Guest]: how do you make it communicable? And then, you know, both for me, Danny Rodrik and Paul
[Guest]: Krugman were, were really very influential, both in content, you know, Danny's early writings
[Guest]: on political economy were, I think, very, very insightful for me. So also to think about,
[Guest]: you know, you know, not just state and markets, but the whole, you know, because remember,
[Guest]: when we used to speak about, you know, market failure, but I think, you know, the whole
[Guest]: question about what is state failure was a very important issue. And therefore, understanding
[Guest]: political economy, you know, what all the things going on, ideology, interests, institutions,
[Guest]: the rich interactions between them, I think that was something that I always read about
[Guest]: and followed, kind of very, very closely. And, you know, my second question arising
[Amit Varma]: from that is that, you know, when I read your work, when I read your writings, and your
[Amit Varma]: speeches and so on, I, I sense this deep sense of conviction, like you've very often spoken
[Amit Varma]: about how during your time, as the chief economic advisor, you would wake up every morning excited
[Amit Varma]: about the day because, you know, every day was so exciting. And obviously, it's exciting
[Amit Varma]: because you actually get a chance to sort of make a change in the world. And earlier,
[Amit Varma]: when you were, you know, talking about your sort of career that, you know, you do an MBA,
[Amit Varma]: the civil services doesn't happen. So you go to Oxford. And after that, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: feel academics is not the place for you, and then so on and your entire career path. And
[Amit Varma]: there, it seemed like, okay, you're sort of going along a career path. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's a little bit of serendipity to it. So at what point did you start feeling this
[Amit Varma]: sense of conviction about your work that look, my work can make a difference to the world?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was there a time where you looked at something and said, this is a problem, I want
[Amit Varma]: to solve this problem, my next study is going to be about this, you know, was that a mindset
[Amit Varma]: that you kind of had from the start? Or did it sort of, you know, evolve over a period
[Guest]: of time?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that, you know, to be honest, it was never. I think the sequence was always,
[Guest]: you know, you find yourself somewhere. And then you say, wow, this thing kind of like
[Guest]: when I was in the GATT, I was working on the intellectual property negotiations. And then,
[Guest]: you know, I said, Oh, my God, there's such a big issue involved here, that I wanted to
[Guest]: work on that. Similarly, when I was in Mauritius, you know, again, I said, Wow, what a fascinating
[Guest]: development experience this is, and I wanted to write. So it's been, it's never been consciously
[Guest]: kind of trying to find something so much as, you know, I find myself somewhere, whatever
[Guest]: for all kinds of, you know, historical persistence reasons. And then, you know, you say, so all
[Guest]: the aid stuff that we did, because I was working in the IMF, you know, in the research department,
[Guest]: and you know, debate was going, you know, there's a raging debate between, you know,
[Guest]: Billy Stille, Jeff Sachs, and others. And then, you know, I said, you know, maybe one
[Guest]: can contribute here. So it was much more that, you know, not so much consciously seeking
[Guest]: as you know, just finding yourself in places. And of course, I mean, to be honest, I, the
[Guest]: thing is that, you know, my kind of principle guiding my research is that, A, the question
[Guest]: has to be, you know, very important in terms of policy, you know, I'm not going to do anything
[Guest]: that doesn't have a policy impact. And that it has to, you know, the contribution has
[Guest]: to be novel and new. So the combination of important in terms of policy, but if I must
[Guest]: have something new to say, otherwise, you know, it's not worth it, why bother, you know,
[Guest]: so many. So, so there is a kind of, you know, kind of a shock or a novelty element to, you
[Guest]: know, the stuff that I do. And part of it, of course, is, you know, part of that is also
[Guest]: a way of getting people's attention to important policy issues. Because I remember the, even
[Guest]: the, you know, the early patent work that I did, you know, I kind of said, you know,
[Guest]: the loss is like $1 billion, or whatever. So putting numbers onto policy questions,
[Guest]: I think is also something that I really, you know, that kind of, you know, really turns
[Guest]: me on and motivates me as well. So the combination of, you know, new, important and new facts
[Guest]: to kind of evidence to bring to bear. And the difference, I guess, why I don't, maybe
[Guest]: haven't chosen this hardcore academic career is because, I mean, I've been less kind of
[Guest]: obsessed with this whole, you know, you must show causation in kind of rigorous ways. I
[Guest]: mean, for me, the big facts are as important as anything else that should be done. And
[Guest]: I think facts change the world. I mean, I can give you examples of that, not not my
[Guest]: own research, but lots of other people, it's much more the big facts that I think that
[Guest]: have a big impact on the world and policymaking, as much as any kind of sophisticated attempt
[Guest]: at showing it, well, you know, this happens because of this, you know, that's important,
[Amit Varma]: but I think its role is
[Amit Varma]: I'd love a couple of examples of big facts that had that kind of impact.
[Guest]: So I think that, you know, to give you one example, you know, Karthik was on your show
[Guest]: a few weeks ago. You know, for me, certainly that the finding that the work on teacher
[Guest]: absenteeism in India, I think kind of changed a little bit the way we thought about the
[Guest]: education debate in India, that, you know, you focus on or, you know, whatever, you know,
[Guest]: you need to pour money, or you need to do other things. But then suddenly, this fact
[Guest]: comes and hits you and says, wow, you know, this is like, you know, we've completely forgotten
[Guest]: about, you know, teachers not showing up, and you know, what that does. And I think
[Guest]: that set in train, a whole different way of looking at it. And I think, you know, similarly,
[Guest]: I think, you know, the patent stuff that I spoke about, I think, that, and, you know,
[Guest]: for example, if you look around the world, the whole, you know, the work that Piketty
[Guest]: and his co authors have done, you know, kind of documenting, you know, the rise in a particular
[Guest]: kind of inequality, top inequality, you know, you may disagree with the policy conclusions
[Guest]: that follow. But the fact is, the world is a very different place in terms of understanding
[Guest]: the world, because of knowing those facts about the world. So I think that there are,
[Guest]: you know, the other, you know, just to give a personal example, is that, you know, in
[Guest]: the economic survey, we did some work on migration, based on data that nobody had ever used in
[Guest]: India and data that, you know, we had the privilege of getting access to because I was
[Guest]: in government, this was the the railway data that we had. And my team and I, we made some
[Guest]: use of it. And the numbers that came out, you know, were pretty striking, much bigger
[Guest]: than what we had believed migration within India was all about. And of course, we presented
[Guest]: it, I think it didn't gain a lot of traction, or people weren't quite didn't cotton on to
[Guest]: it. But when the actual COVID crisis happened, the migrant crisis happened, it kind of showed
[Guest]: that that work was, in some ways, you know, not incorrect in the quantification of the
[Guest]: magnitudes and so on. So I think, you know, kind of facts are really, you know, but doing
[Guest]: it very carefully, rigorously, but on important issues. And that's what I think is really,
[Guest]: for me, is very, very challenging and important. And so, you know, even in government, I think
[Guest]: people underestimate, you know, the quality of a simple chart. Because I remember very
[Guest]: early on, this was, you know, I joined late 2014, early 2015. And we were having these
[Guest]: discussions within government on, you know, what to do, etc. And I think, you know, there's
[Guest]: not a there's not rocket science, I showed Mr. Arun Jaitley a chart of, you know, real
[Guest]: wages declining, rural real wages declining. And, you know, I could see that, you know,
[Guest]: he really made a real impression on him. He took note of it. And of course, he acted on
[Guest]: it in ways that I'm not sure, even I don't know fully, but he did act on it. And I think
[Guest]: that so things like that, I think, are really quite, quite important.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in one of your interviews, you use the phrase the Dracula effect, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, to shine sunlight on something. So that it kind of becomes obvious. And I was struck
[Amit Varma]: by that. So I want to follow sort of a couple of simultaneous parts during the rest of our
[Amit Varma]: conversation. One is that, through your readings through your books, through your writings,
[Amit Varma]: rather than through your books, I've, you know, gained a lot of insights about India's
[Amit Varma]: economy post independence. So I want to sort of discuss that journey, the journey that
[Amit Varma]: the Indian economy has made from 47 to here, and sort of where we are today, and obviously
[Amit Varma]: zoom in on the years that you were actually in government and all of that. And at the
[Amit Varma]: same time, I'm fascinated by, you know, your experiences within that beast, we call the
[Amit Varma]: Indian state, and you know, your efforts to sort of bring about reform within that. And
[Amit Varma]: many of my listeners are not sort of trained economists that they'll kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: be familiar with all of this already. And so what I'll say is that, you know, to begin
[Amit Varma]: with, can you give me a sense of, you know, go back to the choices that we made post independence
[Amit Varma]: and maybe for two or three decades since and what was so unique about this experiment,
[Amit Varma]: like you've spoken about what you called a precocious development model, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: the two significant ways in which this was so strikingly different and a unique experiment.
[Guest]: So can you can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: Yeah. Um, so, you know, maybe I will, you know, jump first forward and then backward
[Guest]: in time. And I'll come back to your question. So I guess, my first real academic piece on
[Guest]: the Indian economy, which was also a kind of which, as you know, triggered a massive
[Guest]: debate in India, which was this paper that Danny and I wrote on, you know, how growth
[Guest]: took off in the 1980s, especially in 1979, even though the reforms began only in 1991.
[Guest]: So you know, it provoked a massive discussion, because people said, no, no, no, you know,
[Guest]: you know, because there are two camps, right, the camp that says, you know, you get growth
[Guest]: through reforms. And then even the fact that actually, some people had noted that, you
[Guest]: know, India's actually the growth take off happens actually 79, 1980. But you know, before
[Guest]: that, we had the Hindu rate of growth, you grow at about three, three and a half percent.
[Guest]: And then suddenly, from 1979, 80, onwards, we grow at about 6%. And so just highlighting
[Guest]: that fact, and then saying, we have to try and understand this, that if you, you know,
[Guest]: if you accept this, then how did we get this sudden, because the real acceleration is not
[Guest]: between, you know, the 80s and 90s. Because remember, the 90s growth is pretty much the
[Guest]: same as the 80s growth. So how did that happen? And so that was, for me, a real, you know,
[Guest]: eye opener. And that, you know, my partial explanation for what happened in the 1980s,
[Guest]: kind of then allows me to now kind of step back and say, come back to your question,
[Guest]: which is that, you know, if you look at the kind of broad development choices that we
[Guest]: made, you know, and choices to some extent is within quotes, because, you know, some
[Guest]: of it is just persistence in history and, and personality. So, you know, how much active
[Guest]: agency there was in these choices, when we use the word choice, we connote agency, which
[Guest]: may not, at least historically may not be completely accurate. But I think there were
[Guest]: two or three, I would say the big development choices that we made, right? One is, you know,
[Guest]: from day one, you're a democracy, and not so. So if you look at, you know, there's a
[Guest]: recent paper that I wrote with Rohit Lamba, which kind of brings it out, even more clearly,
[Guest]: it was first there in the economic survey. If you think about it, if you look at the
[Guest]: successful models of economic development, there were the two big models, right? One
[Guest]: is Western Europe, and the US, which is essentially what happens is that you economic development
[Guest]: happens over, you know, 150 200 years, and political development, you know, happens alongside.
[Guest]: So there's slow economic and co terminus, co evolving, slow political development, and
[Guest]: that's happened over 250 years, successful, and so on. The other model is the East Asian
[Guest]: model, which is, you know, post 19, World War Two, you have a sudden burst of economic
[Guest]: growth, you know, just to give put some numbers, Western Europe grew at about, let's say, two
[Guest]: and a half percent per capita over 200 years, East Asia, you know, Japan, the Tigers, China,
[Guest]: and now Vietnam, they grow rapidly, Korea, of course, they grow rapidly, over 50, 50,
[Guest]: 60 years, and kind of achieve almost the same level of, you know, income as advanced countries.
[Guest]: But so there's more rapid economic development, right? But there's a sequencing, you know,
[Guest]: economic development comes first, and then political development follows. So you have
[Guest]: these two kind of broad models. And India defies that, you know, India's model, which
[Guest]: says from day one, you have democracy. So both economic development happens after or
[Guest]: at least the attempt is made to happen after political development. So, so that kind of
[Guest]: a, and remember, again, important historical fact is that it's not that this has not happened
[Guest]: at all. There are only four or five other countries in the world that began democracy
[Guest]: and embarked on economic development. But these are very small countries, you know,
[Guest]: Costa Rica, Botswana, the Caribbean countries, and so on. So there's no comparable, you know,
[Guest]: a large, so this is really striking. So therefore, what does that mean for development? And something
[Guest]: that I'll come to in just a second. So that was one big choice, you know, democracy first,
[Guest]: and then you embark on development. Then, of course, we had, you know, the whole commanding
[Guest]: heights, etc, etc. But remember that the whole import substitution protecting domestic industry
[Guest]: etc, etc, that India chose, whatever, we may have done it to a much more serious extent
[Guest]: than say, Latin America did. But I think we should never forget that that choice of state
[Guest]: led development was completely consistent with the zeitgeist of the times, you know,
[Guest]: not just, you know, at that point, we thought, you know, the Russian model was doing very
[Guest]: well. Remember, I think there's a very famous scene, event when Khrushchev goes to the United
[Guest]: Nations, he picks up his shoe, and bangs it on the podium and says, we will bury you.
[Guest]: And people thought he said, we're going to, you know, devastate a nuclear holocaust of
[Guest]: the West. But actually, what he meant was, we economically, we will devastate you, we
[Guest]: are model is doing so well, that we will, you know, show you that this is the right
[Guest]: model. So if you look at Russia, if you look at the Great Depression, if you look at many
[Guest]: developing countries, and of course, the whole rise of the welfare state in Europe as well.
[Guest]: So, so that choice, I think, was not at all unusual, you may, you know, say, right, wrong,
[Guest]: we can come to that later. But it was not, I think, what was really distinctive about
[Guest]: India is that we combine that with this horrendously complicated system, which, you know, Rajaji
[Guest]: famously called the License Quota Parmitraj, which, you know, there was the complexity,
[Guest]: there was the corruption that happened, you know, which is going to be, you know, which
[Guest]: is probably the most devastating legacy of all of that. But what was distinctive about
[Guest]: that was, look, and this is something that people don't, you know, grasp sufficiently.
[Guest]: When you protect, you want to help the domestic entrepreneur, you know, whatever, you know,
[Guest]: the Bombay, we remember the Bombay plan, basically self serving saying, you know, protect so
[Guest]: that you know, we can do it. So that's understood. But the whole, especially licensing, it actually
[Guest]: taxed domestic producers. So whereas protection gives you, you know, is a favor granted to
[Guest]: domestic industry, license is a tax on domestic industry, because you say, you can't produce
[Guest]: more than so much, you know, every time you want to do this, you have to come and ask
[Guest]: someone. So that tax on domestic production in a sense. So it was a very unusual model,
[Guest]: where there was both import substitution, but a tax on domestic, basically domestic
[Guest]: entrepreneurial activity was taxed in a way that very few countries do. And so that was
[Guest]: the second kind of the big distinctive thing. The third, of course, I think big choice was
[Guest]: that. And the way I like to put it is to say that, you know, this is the country, it's
[Guest]: a premature democracy, democracies redistribute, we know that there's on top of that, there's
[Guest]: the overlay of this hideous hierarchy that we call caste, and so on. So how do you redress
[Guest]: historical inequality, I think, broadly, there would have been two ways of doing it. One
[Guest]: is the whole opportunity route, you give everyone education, etc. But I call this, you know,
[Guest]: we of course, did not do that, I think it was our second original sin. But instead,
[Guest]: what we did was we went in for these guarantees. So I call this in the opportunity versus guarantee
[Guest]: thing, you know, we went in for guarantees, which is the whole, what we call reservation
[Guest]: and so on. And we can talk about so these were kind of three big choices that we made.
[Guest]: Now, I want to link that, why did I jumpstart with 1980, 1990, is because, in some ways,
[Guest]: what happened in the 1980s, was that that tax that we imposed on domestic industry,
[Guest]: was when we kind of said, let's relax these tax, because remember, we call those pro business,
[Guest]: not pro competition reforms, because the competition only began in 1990. After the opening up,
[Guest]: the 80s reform was very much, you know, helping incumbents helping domestic business by giving
[Guest]: them better access to inputs, technology, you know, all of that. So in some ways, the
[Guest]: 80s rectify or began to rectify the distinctive tax that we impose. And that's kind of partly
[Guest]: our explanation for why kind of, so if I wanted to put it provocatively, I would say that
[Guest]: the 80s were in fact, the first decade that we actually did import substitution, because
[Guest]: you know, we continue to protect our domestic industry, but we remove the tax on them. And
[Guest]: so that happened, of course, the rest is history, we had a crisis, etc, etc.
[Amit Varma]: I was sort of struck by these sort of broad strands which are happening through Indian
[Amit Varma]: history. And it's not only economic, but obviously, the thinking encompasses that one, as you
[Amit Varma]: pointed out is the whole command and control mindset, which, as you said, was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it was the belief of the time, it was completely the rational way to go. In fact, it would
[Amit Varma]: have been going against the grain to not go that way. So that's completely understandable.
[Amit Varma]: The second thing that really happens in the political domain, but the thinking carries
[Amit Varma]: through I think, to how you should run the economy is that we don't build a new state,
[Amit Varma]: we take over the existing colonial apparatus. And that is essentially the state. And that,
[Amit Varma]: of course, has, you know, is incredibly oppressive. In the words of Somnath Lahiri, it's like
[Amit Varma]: a state designed to be a policeman. And that mindset somehow seems to carry through when
[Amit Varma]: not only do we do the sort of welfarism and the redistribution that is inevitable, because
[Amit Varma]: we are a democracy, even though you know, we've reached that stage much earlier than
[Amit Varma]: other democracies, which became wealthy before they became began to redistribute, we don't
[Amit Varma]: have that option. But that's kind of fine. But not only do we do that, we also constrain
[Amit Varma]: private capital and distrust private capital, like Nehru once said to JRD Tata, do not talk
[Amit Varma]: to me of profit. It is a dirty word, stock quote. And that mindset seems to kind of carry
[Amit Varma]: through. And like you, I'm inclined to excuse, you know, Nehru for some of these errors,
[Amit Varma]: because they were very much the fashion of the time, like you said, import substitution,
[Amit Varma]: and whatever. And like, you've pointed out that, you know, the industrial policy regulation
[Amit Varma]: was a huge issue there. And you've also spoken elsewhere of bank nationalization being one
[Amit Varma]: of the original sins. In fact, there's a great quote of yours, which I found, you know, would
[Amit Varma]: not come from other economists, but from someone who reads a lot of literature, which is where
[Amit Varma]: you've pointed out quote, over time, original sins become lasting virtues, stop quote. And
[Amit Varma]: that's something I'll come back to, because I think some of the original sins are not
[Amit Varma]: these specific policies, but a way of thinking about the world, which, you know, one can
[Amit Varma]: argue, remains to this current day. And those debates sort of over the, you know, the 1980s,
[Amit Varma]: your 2004 paper with Danny Roderick, the debates with Srinivasan, Panagaria, and so on. It's
[Amit Varma]: very fascinating. But what kind of strikes me is that even these sort of reforms where
[Amit Varma]: first you have the pro business reforms of the 80s, and you remove some of these restrictions,
[Amit Varma]: and then the limited liberalization of 91, which, you know, did not touch factor markets
[Amit Varma]: and so much more could have been done. But despite them being so limited, they had such
[Amit Varma]: a massive impact on the people, you know, they caused so much good that one can only,
[Amit Varma]: you know, fantasize about what the counterfactual could have been.
[Guest]: Yeah. So I think I mean, just to go back on a couple of points on the historical thing,
[Guest]: right. You know, when I try and understand why we did industrial licensing, and you know,
[Guest]: that whole apparatus of regulating and taxing domestic industry. And, you see, one has to
[Guest]: try and understand that. And one of the ways I think one partial explanation is that, to
[Guest]: me, that it was kind of like the Gandhian overlay on kind of policy, which is that,
[Guest]: you know, remember, in those days, we had this mortal fear of big, you know, big business,
[Guest]: you know, people becoming too big, and therefore, you know, what will happen to our democracy
[Guest]: if you know, if you have these very powerful actors. So in a sense, the only way one of
[Guest]: the ways I understand this whole industrial licensing was to say that, you know, we don't
[Guest]: want even domestic capital, we don't want them to that's why we had, you know, MRTP.
[Guest]: And you know, the sticks and carrots given to remaining small, and preventing small from
[Guest]: becoming big. I think I see that as, you know, the other big idea underlying the early choices,
[Guest]: you know. So, you know, so if you go deeper than just saying, why did we tax, you know,
[Guest]: domestic capital, I think the deeper thing is that, you know, this, you know, kind of
[Guest]: thing we had for small, but it was Kadi village industries, you know, reservation for the
[Guest]: small scale sector, you know, you know, all these laws applying, coming into play when
[Guest]: you be exceeding certain size, and the whole fiscal regulatory apparatus, if you look back,
[Guest]: was really about, you know, you know, favouring the small and preventing the becoming big.
[Guest]: And I would argue that, you know, that aspect actually has come to hurt us quite a lot over
[Guest]: time, especially when we look more recently at how we've done on, you know, low skill
[Guest]: manufacturing, which, you know, exports of low skill manufacturing, which require really
[Guest]: size, and so on. So I think that's one thing, one historical fact, I think, which we should
[Guest]: keep in mind. The other is this whole premature democracy thing, right? I think that, as you
[Guest]: rightly said, that, you know, the famous finding is that, you know, by definition, democracy,
[Guest]: you know, if you look at the work of Ace Mogloo and Robinson, they almost say that, you know,
[Guest]: democracy, in a sense, was a pre commitment to redistribution, in a way that just a promise
[Guest]: of redistribution could not guarantee. So democracies have to redistribute. And of course,
[Guest]: in addition, remember, what is distinctive about India, is that you not just have the
[Guest]: imperative of redistribution on one axis of class, you also have it on, obviously, caste,
[Guest]: you know, we have so you have it on the base of region, that's why we had all these policies
[Guest]: which says, you know, region should be whatever. So when you have this desire to redistribute,
[Guest]: or this imperative to redistribute on along not just one line, but many lines, you know,
[Guest]: you're going to have a problem. And the premature part comes in is that, you know,
[Guest]: your capacity to do that is just completely incommensurate with that. And kind of this
[Guest]: speaks to your point about, you know, you inherit a state that's basically a kind of,
[Guest]: you know, police state performing all these functions. It neither has the capacity nor
[Guest]: the remember, I think we should be harsh on our early things, that after all the state at that
[Guest]: point should have said, you know, we can't do many things. But we should provide say health
[Guest]: and education to everyone, like what China did, they didn't do that. And of course, you don't
[Guest]: have the fiscal capacity, either to deliver on redistribution, or in kind of raising the resources
[Guest]: required to this. So that is why what happens is that redistribution willy nilly takes the form
[Guest]: of messing with the price system. Because remember, prices are the, you know, if you can't,
[Guest]: you know, today, we say, you know, redistribute, either you build schools or whatever education,
[Guest]: or you have transfers, efficient transfers, whatever, right? But then you had neither.
[Guest]: And then so the only way you redistribute is through messing around with the price system
[Guest]: and distorting everything, you know, low prices for goods, cheap inputs. And so you just
[Guest]: tamper systematically with the price system. And then that's what, you know, persists over time,
[Guest]: it exacts a huge cost toll in terms of the economy. But again, I think you can be very
[Guest]: critical about it. But I think the criticism should be more that conditional or not,
[Guest]: either being able to, or choosing to do other forms of redistribution, then you're willy nilly
[Guest]: left with this. So just to give you a modern day counterpart of this, you know, and this is the
[Guest]: GST, and because I was kind of privy to these discussions. So take the GST discussion, for
[Guest]: example, right, on the what should be the rate structure for the GST. And I think this really
[Guest]: really typifies the early dilemma in some ways, except that it's 75 years on. So we all know that,
[Guest]: you know, one rate is the best system, you know, by definition, you know, that's, it's clean,
[Guest]: it's simple, it reduces corruption, it's easy to administer, it's going to improve your tax
[Guest]: collection efficiency. And as the IMF shows, I think, after 2000, almost 80% of the countries
[Guest]: that adopted the value added tax, which is the GST, went in for one rate. So in India,
[Guest]: so we have this discussion, as you know, I wrote a report then saying, we should have three rates,
[Guest]: not one rate. Now, think of it this way, that I would have been completely in favor of one rate,
[Guest]: right. But remember, though, if you go for one rate, you will have to have some rates going up,
[Guest]: right, you know, the rates for essential goods will have to have one rate by definition,
[Guest]: some will go up, some will come down, but some will go up. And those going up will be
[Guest]: affecting those, you know, those are goods generally consumed by poorer people. So what do
[Guest]: you do? If you have instruments to protect, you know, those in some ways, you know, transfers,
[Guest]: whatever, then of course, you would say, you know, one rate. But if you don't have those,
[Guest]: you have a dilemma, right? Can you just say one rate and say, you know, go to hell? I mean,
[Guest]: I think the political process will not allow that. What we've done historically, of course,
[Guest]: is, you know, for every good we say, oh, this is consumed by this strata, this is consumed by this
[Guest]: strata. So you have a multiplicity of rates. Each of them is, you know, trying to meet two
[Guest]: objectives, the efficiency objective, and the kind of equity objective, but, you know, in all its
[Guest]: messy complexity. So what I thought the compromise was that we can't do one, because state capacity
[Guest]: is limited to do the compensation. Therefore, a compromise would be to have, you know, one rate,
[Guest]: but applying to all goods at the lower end, you know, a standard rate, and of course, one demerit
[Guest]: good, which, you know, applies to all the luxuries and so on. So in some ways, the three rate
[Guest]: structure that, you know, that I propose, of course, in practice, and now it's become a multiple,
[Guest]: multiple rate structure. And so it's gotten, it's really, it's gone back to the side of
[Guest]: erring on complexity. And actually, so conceptually, therefore, you know, a three rate was kind of a
[Guest]: compromise between efficiency and equity, because you couldn't ignore equity completely. But
[Guest]: historically, what we did was, you know, we would have as many rates as there are categories of
[Guest]: people we wanted to satisfy. And so that, in a sense, was the early dilemma that, you know,
[Guest]: you didn't have, remember, in 2016, we at least have some mechanisms for redistribution, like
[Guest]: PDS, Monrega, you know, now more and more cash transfers, but at that stage, we had nothing. So
[Guest]: willy nilly, the price system had to bear the brunt of that. And that's where we were. So in
[Guest]: some ways, therefore, you know, again, one has to be careful, it's not that, I mean, obviously,
[Guest]: you know, maintaining and sustaining a democracy are fantastic achievements. And you know, what's
[Guest]: happening to that now, of course, is not within my range of expertise. But to not realise that that
[Guest]: created also some serious consequences and adverse consequences and burdens, one could almost call
[Guest]: it the democracy tax, as it were the premature democracy tax, as it were, you know, you could
[Guest]: see that happening. And to some extent, I think we're paying the price for that.
[Amit Varma]: While you were speaking, a couple of related questions popped up to mind about sort of that
[Amit Varma]: sort of that historic period before we come closer to present time. So I wonder what you
[Amit Varma]: sort of think about these. One, it's always it's not always one in the last couple of years or
[Amit Varma]: more, I've been reading up on it. And I've done a bunch of episodes on the history of and politics
[Amit Varma]: of that period. It struck me that much as we think of the 50s as a time which were Nehruvian,
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that only Nehru was Nehruvian. And it was kind of serendipitous that he was a man in
[Amit Varma]: charge. Now, it certainly seems to me to be this way, at least in the social domain. For example,
[Amit Varma]: if you look at all the other tall leaders of the Congress from Patel to Prasad to Pant to
[Amit Varma]: Lal Bahadur Shastri later, and all of those guys were leaders with a tilt towards Hindu nationalism,
[Amit Varma]: like you know, Pant was CM of UP and Lal Bahadur Shastri was Home Minister when the idol was
[Amit Varma]: installed in the Babri Masjid. So there it seems that Nehru was a man who kind of stood alone.
[Amit Varma]: But in economics, is it necessarily the case that, you know, had Nehru not been there,
[Amit Varma]: for example, I think socially, India would have looked very different. But economically,
[Amit Varma]: would it have been any different? I mean, one hears of the exceptions like Rajaji and Masani
[Amit Varma]: and so on, who were sort of, of a different bent of mind. But one, do your readings give you a
[Amit Varma]: sense that there were different directions that could have happened? And it was this one individual
[Amit Varma]: who happened to be there. And, you know, that's just how the luck played out. And the other
[Amit Varma]: question which is related, so I'll, you know, ask it at the same time is that it seems to me that a
[Amit Varma]: lot of the economic policy of, you know, that period was determined after actual intellectual
[Amit Varma]: query where people were grappling with these questions in good faith. Even if we can look back
[Amit Varma]: in hindsight and say this was a bad decision, or this was a good decision, they were grappling with
[Amit Varma]: it in good faith and trying to figure it out on the basis of ideas. But what seems to me to have
[Amit Varma]: happened towards the end of the 1960s, is that, you know, we know that a lot of Indira Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: leftward tail, the bank nationalization sphera, and so on and so forth, a lot of that leftward
[Amit Varma]: tilt was because she had to politically position herself as being distinctive from the syndicate,
[Amit Varma]: who were her rivals in the Congress. And it seems that at that point, there are sort of three other
[Amit Varma]: imperatives that gradually come into the play and consolidate. One is political imperatives and the
[Amit Varma]: incentives that politicians face, either if they are appealing to populism or to short termism,
[Amit Varma]: because, hey, everybody's got their eye on the next elections. Second, the natural inertia that
[Amit Varma]: sets in into any system, particularly a large bureaucratic system, like ours, and not just
[Amit Varma]: inertia of action, but inertia of thought. And third, the interest groups which then get settled
[Amit Varma]: in and entrenched and make it difficult to change anything. So was that perhaps a tragic shift,
[Amit Varma]: which people don't remark on that we begin with policies that we can criticize today in hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: but that were made in good faith with people like Nehru actually engaging with ideas, but we move
[Amit Varma]: to a cynical time where ideas don't really matter. And you have these incentives from these three
[Guest]: different directions, driving policy. Yeah, I mean, really a terrific question. You see,
[Guest]: I think that we forget when we look at kind of histories of nations, and that there are these
[Guest]: critical junctures in countries' history when, you know, some special things can happen. You know,
[Guest]: it could be at the time of independence, it could be a revolution, it could be a crisis.
[Guest]: So there is something I feel if you look at historically, something distinctive about
[Guest]: certain points in time. And I think, you know, clearly for India, that distinctive period was
[Guest]: the post-independence period, partly a result of this. So I think therefore, kind of two or
[Guest]: three things come together, right? One is this moment of, you know, idealism, and so on. And
[Guest]: that's critical juncture. Second is almost intrinsic to these movements is you are going to
[Guest]: have politicians with the temperament of, you know, let's set aside personal things, and whatever.
[Guest]: Maybe the third aspect what happened in those early years also was kind of the dominance of
[Guest]: the Congress Party. So you don't have, you know, political competition. I'm not saying that's
[Guest]: necessarily good. But you did have this kind of, you know, because when Mrs. Gandhi comes into
[Guest]: power, it becomes more competitive. And as Atul Kohli and others have shown, you know, that,
[Guest]: you know, that creates the whole dynamic that you mentioned about interests, and you know,
[Guest]: you need money and so on. So I think a combination of these three things, you know, the critical
[Guest]: moment, the idealism, the quality of leaders, you know, the monopoly of the political monopoly,
[Guest]: which kind of allows you to do certain things that might otherwise not happen. But then that
[Guest]: comes to the other point that you raised about, you know, was it all Nehru? You know, I think it's
[Guest]: undeniable that, you know, state led industrialization, you know, the emphasis on
[Guest]: technology, the emphasis on higher education, I think that certainly comes from, you know,
[Guest]: you read Discovery of India and things, you know, what he wants the, you know, the whole
[Guest]: rationalism emphasis on science, because as you know, I think somewhere in Discovery of India,
[Guest]: he says, quite prescient, I mean, quite accurately, that if you look at history, for example,
[Guest]: around 1450, Mughal India, Aztec America, Aztec Mexico, the Ottoman Empire, were, you know, and
[Guest]: of course, Ming China, were at the top of, you know, development. And that's when the Great
[Guest]: Reversal happens, you know, from about 1500 1600 onwards, and then you have the Great Reversal,
[Guest]: where the two rich countries become poor. And Nehru's point is that even then, we were losing
[Guest]: this edge in science and technology, which kind of contributed. So he was very much into that,
[Guest]: and therefore, but having said that, you know, he had a really dominant role, I think we forget that,
[Guest]: you know, one agriculture, you know, agricultural income was never allowed to be taxed, not because
[Guest]: of Nehru, he would have happily taxed it, it's because of, you know, Sardar Patel and the whole,
[Guest]: you know, agricultural thing. Then you also have, as I just said, you know, the overlay of, you
[Guest]: know, small, remaining small, it's not just a Nehruvian obsession, I think it's also this, you
[Guest]: know, broader obsession with remaining small, which is, I think, you know, partly a Gandhi
[Guest]: legacy, you know, village and small and so on. And of course, also, we forget that, you know,
[Guest]: I think Nehru's instincts would have been to push land reform much more. But you know, land reform
[Guest]: never went anywhere, because partly it was his own democratic instinct, you know, you don't want
[Guest]: anything by coercion, but partly there was this broader thing, I think. So therefore, while his
[Guest]: imprint was very strong, you know, he loved these big temples and dams and things, you know,
[Guest]: so all of that, that whole commanding heights, I think is very much him, but there were lots of
[Guest]: other things, which perhaps were not due to him. And, you know, again, counterfactual history is
[Guest]: very difficult, because my sense is that, and I think it's an important point that we forget,
[Guest]: that I'm not sure, you know, the whole Rajaji's strand of thinking, whether that was ever dominant
[Guest]: enough to have, you know, because at that stage, you know, people were completely unfamiliar with
[Guest]: how a market economy in all its kind of full blown thing functions. So I think it would have been,
[Guest]: you know, I think our choices, even looking back, I think our choices would have been,
[Guest]: you know, statism or less statism, never, you know, a full blown kind of market economy. But
[Guest]: I think some of the more egregious, I mean, industrial licensing, I think, was something
[Guest]: that we could have really avoided. And of course, I think, you know, I'm just being, you know,
[Guest]: unnecessarily kind of, you know, bold here. But I think, had we done the education and health
[Guest]: that a state should have done, and, you know, not had industrial licensing, for example,
[Guest]: and allowed actually domestic entrepreneurship to flourish, you know, maybe, you know,
[Amit Varma]: trajectory of Indian history would have been different. On that wistful note, let's take a
[Amit Varma]: quick commercial break. On the scene and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you. Head on over to IndianColors.com. Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of
[Amit Varma]: the best contemporary artists in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags,
[Amit Varma]: pouches, and home decor items. You get to surround yourself with the finest modern
[Amit Varma]: Indian art at affordable prices, and artists get royalties for every product you buy. Win-win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmoy Samanta, Manisha Ghera
[Amit Varma]: Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaideep Mehrotra. Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors. Corporate gifting is also
[Amit Varma]: available. So head on over to IndianColors.com, that's colors with an OU, and make art a part of
[Amit Varma]: your life. And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen. That's right. Unseen for 15% off
[Amit Varma]: at IndianColors.com. Welcome back to the scene and the unseen. I'm chatting with Arvind Subramanian
[Amit Varma]: on both the fascinating journey of India as an economy and his own fascinating journey in
[Amit Varma]: playing a part in shaping this economy. And we've sort of been stuck in history for the first half
[Amit Varma]: of the show. Let's let's kind of get closer to modern times now where you've kind of spoken
[Amit Varma]: about one of the transitions that India made was in sort of moving from socialism with restricted
[Amit Varma]: entry to capitalism without exit. And you've also spoken about the latinization of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: economy. And all this is, of course, happening post liberalization. And, you know, so tell me a
[Amit Varma]: little bit about these currents of change that are happening within the Indian economy, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for the two decades leading up to 2014, when you know, you finally arrive in India as a CEA.
[Guest]: So I think that India's growth takes off in the 1980s. And then we have this macroeconomic crisis
[Guest]: in 1991. Of course, partly it was because the 80s growth was also fueled by this, you know,
[Guest]: fiscal binge that we went on. And of course, the fiscal binge we went on was partly also for the
[Guest]: first time politics becomes remember, at that stage, the Congress loses monopoly, not just at
[Guest]: the center, but also in the states. So politics becomes much more competitive. And therefore,
[Guest]: I think we find, you know, fiscal policy becoming much more an instrument of, you know,
[Guest]: politics, a much more intrinsic, you know, part of politics. And we have this binge, we have,
[Guest]: you know, imports, you know, going up, classic running out of foreign exchange, it's what,
[Guest]: you know, Krugman and call a first generation crisis was essentially, you have a fixed exchange
[Guest]: rate, the government spends too much, you run out of foreign exchange, and lo and behold,
[Guest]: and then of course, we had, you know, the real opening of the Indian economy. We move from the
[Guest]: pro business reforms of the 1980s, to the pro market and the pro competition reforms in the 90s.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, there are different phases, what happens, but essentially,
[Guest]: when I look back at the Indian economy, and I'm, you know, doing some work with a colleague,
[Guest]: Sumitra Chatterjee, on how India's trade is done. But if you look back, I think that the 90s and
[Guest]: the 2000s, leading up to about 2011-2012, I think it was just a golden age for the Indian economy.
[Guest]: I think that, you know, in broad terms, I'll come to what happened, why it kind of ran out of steam.
[Guest]: But I think it was a golden age, you know, we were obviously we opened up, we reaped a lot of
[Guest]: the benefits of opening up the efficiency, and so on. Then, of course, we had this,
[Guest]: some would say serendipitous, whatever this discovery of the service sector, the IT sector.
[Guest]: But if you look at the 90s and 2000s, I'm beginning to see how across the board,
[Guest]: how well the economy performed. It was not just, you know, services, it was not just manufacturing,
[Guest]: it was just across the board. So clearly, we reaped benefits. And what has struck me recently
[Guest]: is that, you know, in the boom of the 2000s, you know, every economy in the world boomed,
[Guest]: but we did much better even relative to other economies. Even our exports were growing
[Guest]: gangbusters in the 2000s. That's something that I've been really surprised by. So we had this,
[Guest]: you know, incredible, you know, kind of the golden age of, you know, the Indian economy
[Guest]: in the 90s and 2000s. Definitely, you know, some of it, of course, as we said earlier,
[Guest]: is also catch up, you know, you do a little bit of reform, you're so far away from the frontier,
[Guest]: you know, our per capita GDP, let's say 1980 was like, probably 3-4% of US per capita GDP.
[Guest]: So, you know, there is a logic which says, if you're very far behind, you will have some
[Guest]: advantage of cheaper labor, you know, so you can grow much more rapidly. And so we reaped,
[Guest]: so a combination of, you know, that, you know, the advantage of backwardness, as it were,
[Guest]: we were very poor, then we did these reforms. And, you know, some basic, you know, ability
[Guest]: in the economy, some, you know, skilled labor, some modicum of state capacity, whatever,
[Guest]: allowed us to do gangbusters. And then, of course, you know, the global financial crisis happens,
[Guest]: you know, the world economy collapses. And really, my reading is that we never really
[Guest]: recovered from that era. So that, in a sense, was what happened. We never really recovered from
[Guest]: that. And of course, you know, this is where I think a new kind of problem arises. And the other
[Guest]: and the other problem that is, let me speak about both of these, is that, remember, we never
[Guest]: believed in markets, we never believed in capitalism, right? I mean, that is always,
[Guest]: and in a sense, the license quota Raj, kind of, in some extent, intensified that, you know,
[Guest]: you could, in fact, some people call it the era of crony socialism, not just crony capitalism,
[Guest]: but crony socialism, some truth to that. I mean, we forget today, how even some of the early
[Guest]: entrepreneurs, I mean, really became big by manipulating the minutiae of the excise and
[Guest]: tariff code. I mean, you know, it's incredible, right? So it was always, you know, it was always
[Guest]: stigmatized capitalism, we forget. Then, of course, we had this brief period where we says,
[Guest]: wow, you know, we've now got at least a modicum of capitalism, which is not based on proximity
[Guest]: to the state, or favors from the state. And that was the rise of the services, you know,
[Guest]: that whole period of the services boom, it was not just services, but saying, wow, India can do
[Guest]: a form of capitalism, that is, you know, based on good governance, corporate governance,
[Guest]: based on not getting favors from government, and, you know, and can be internationally competitive.
[Guest]: So this is kind of, you know, the brief window when we said, Oh, my God, you know,
[Guest]: Indian capitalism is here. And then, of course, what happens is that we have all these scandals
[Guest]: of the 2000s, you know, so the way I phrase that period, you know, what Rajaji called the license
[Guest]: quota permit Raj, I call that period the rents Raj, because, and you know, just to be a little
[Guest]: bit cute about this, I said, you have ethereal rents, terrestrial rents and subterranean rents,
[Guest]: which is, you know, spectrum, you know, land, coal, you know, so the rents Raj. And then,
[Guest]: of course, the rents Raj is absolutely devastating, because, you know, you say,
[Guest]: you're back to this old kind of, you know, stigmatized, sort of a crony, socialism,
[Guest]: capitalism, but really, we're not really gone past that, you know, really messy relationship
[Guest]: between the state and capital. And, of course, as a result, you know, both come out with their
[Guest]: legitimacy completely undermined. And so therefore, you know, we're back in a sense,
[Guest]: post those scandals, in terms of political economy, we're back to a situation where,
[Guest]: you know, neither the state nor the thing has legitimacy. So what do you do about it? So coming
[Guest]: now to the period that, you know, I was in government for 2013-14 onwards, I mean, I do
[Guest]: think that a lot of the choices looking back, oh, sorry, the other thing I forgot to mention in that
[Guest]: era of, you know, thing was the whole, you know, we had the infrastructure boom, but it also was
[Guest]: financed by, you know, the public sector with all the phone, telephone banking, and all that. So
[Guest]: that is part of the rents Raj that happened. So fast forward to 20, you know, 14, 15, so on,
[Guest]: I think a lot of the choices then were taking place against the, you know, background of this,
[Guest]: you know, stigmatized capitalism. So that constrains a kind of lot of your choices
[Guest]: going forward. So and of course, and this is where then you come to this capitalism without
[Guest]: exit problem. And the two are related. And I'll explain that you had a question. So let me explain
[Amit Varma]: that. Yeah, I just wanted to sort of sum up my understanding of this period and ask you if
[Amit Varma]: you know, it broadly sounds okay to you and also end with a question. And one is that it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me that what happened in 91 was obviously that it was serendipitous. It was a crisis, we had no choice.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I've had Ajay Shah on the show before, and he's spoken about how they would,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that intellectual infrastructure of reforms was actually happening from the 80s.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you had would be reformers all their thinking along those lines. And there was some
[Amit Varma]: back end there, it wasn't just serendipitous. But what it seems to me that happened was that
[Amit Varma]: local crisis forced us into this bunch of changes. But then we got complacent very fast.
[Amit Varma]: We took the progress, we took the growth for granted, we took the progress for granted.
[Amit Varma]: But the mindset remained the same. The state apparatus remained the same with the Indian
[Amit Varma]: state remained one which doesn't do like it should do a few things well, instead of which it does a
[Amit Varma]: lot of things badly. And that kind of broadly continued. So no mindset change. And we take the
[Amit Varma]: growth for granted and don't learn the big lessons that we should learn from it about unleashing
[Amit Varma]: private entrepreneurship and so on. And then there's this excellent book by Pooja Mehra,
[Amit Varma]: I wonder what you think about it called The Lost Decade, where she recounts the events,
[Amit Varma]: you know, after 2008, and what happened in UPA2, where basically, because of the terrorist attacks
[Amit Varma]: in Bombay, Chidambaram is shifted to the Home Ministry. And so Sonia Gandhi wants Pranab
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee in the Finance Ministry as he's installed there, and he remains there for a long period.
[Amit Varma]: And his mindset is the 70s sort of socialist mindset of the Indira Gandhi era. And it is
[Amit Varma]: pretty disastrous, because that is when you know, you're having the phone alone scandals, you're
[Amit Varma]: having the retrospective taxation. And it's as if the mindset has just done a complete reverse,
[Amit Varma]: and we start going downhill. And Pooja's narrative, of course, has him being booted upstairs to the
[Amit Varma]: presidency. But there's not enough time for Chidambaram back in the Finance Ministry to make
[Amit Varma]: much of a difference. And she describes that period of the, you know, when the Modi government
[Amit Varma]: comes into power, the first few months is being pretty hopeful, you have the bankruptcy code,
[Amit Varma]: you have a lot of good people in good positions like yourself, and, you know, like Mr. Panagari
[Amit Varma]: at Niti Aayog and whatever, so there is some hope that reform will happen. But then there are those
[Amit Varma]: jibes of Sood Bhut ki Sarkar, and then there are, you know, state elections being lost. And,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like you also mentioned, the Sood Bhut ki Sarkar jibe, in a sense, speaks directly to
[Amit Varma]: the fear of stigmatized capitalism. And what has happened in all this time is that people in India,
[Amit Varma]: sadly, still confuse pro markets and pro business and they still, you know, mistake capitalism for
[Amit Varma]: cronyism, whether you call it crony socialism or crony capitalism doesn't really matter. But it's,
[Amit Varma]: it's cronyism, it's not free markets. And all of this leads to the political imperatives changing
[Amit Varma]: and not enough reform happening there. And we'll, of course, get to the sort of the specific
[Amit Varma]: economic policies of the Modi government after this. But, you know, is this a summary that you
[Amit Varma]: broadly sort of agree with? And if so, or if not, were you sort of, you know, how cognizant were you
[Amit Varma]: of this entire changing picture and the politics of the situation when you joined?
[Guest]: Yeah, firstly, just going back to the point that you made about the 1990 reform, I think that
[Guest]: there is no doubt that it was, of course, part the crisis, but there's no doubt that there was a,
[Guest]: you know, something else going on. And I would put that something else, partly as, of course,
[Guest]: all these, you know, would be reformers, you know, exposed to ideas outside coming in, and, you know,
[Guest]: and, you know, having more, more influence. But I also think that, you know, if you look back,
[Guest]: after all, it's not that just again, intellectual history, that in the 70s and 80s, after all,
[Guest]: people said, look, look at the East Asian tigers, they're doing well, you know, what you guys,
[Guest]: I think that the reaction, the pushback always was, you know, but we're India, we're big,
[Guest]: whatever. But I think a critical element of the change also was the rise of China. I think that
[Guest]: China was a country that, you know, embraced reforms, foreign direct investment, etc. I mean,
[Guest]: we come to the, you know, the other part of the Chinese stories, which also which we haven't
[Guest]: internalised, which is the early health and education thing that we'll talk about. But
[Guest]: certainly when you know, when China in the 80s started booming and embracing things, I think
[Guest]: that took the final leg out of the, you know, the pushback that oh, no, no, this is not for us,
[Guest]: we are whatever. So absolutely right. I think there was intellectual thing building up. But
[Guest]: also shaped by experiences around the world, and a critical one being the rise of China.
[Guest]: See, now, coming back to, you know, what you said about, you know, Pooja Mehra's excellent book,
[Guest]: and how you read what happened. Look, I don't think we have to be a little bit careful here.
[Guest]: I don't think anyone believes today that we should go back to, you know, 60s, 70s style
[Guest]: statism. And I think there has been a decisive shift. I think that's no, I don't think there's
[Guest]: any, it's more, I think that once we've transitioned from the state as owner to the
[Guest]: state as regulator, and the state potentially as provider of other public goods, I think that's
[Guest]: where I think now the locus of action has shifted to that. I think the problem is that all these
[Guest]: discussions have really been, you know, messed up by that experience of the 2000s and all that
[Guest]: happened that you described. And you described that, you know, in Pooja Mehra's book as well.
[Guest]: And look, I think the closer we are to history, the more we try and put it down to individuals
[Guest]: and so on. In a way that I think it's something that we need to guard against. I think it's true
[Guest]: that, you know, in the 50s, we were talking about the 50s, we talked about, you know, not just Nehru,
[Guest]: but all the things. So there's a natural, the closer you are, the more you try and look at it
[Guest]: in terms of, you know, individuals, and he went here and he went there. And all that I'm not saying
[Guest]: is not true. It's just that I think that we don't have the kind of distance to step back and say,
[Guest]: are there kind of deeper things going wrong. And in my view that, you know, it's not that I think
[Guest]: we said, let's go back to statism. No, I think we've decisively, the sense that I think that
[Guest]: we should be more open is there. So if you look at the early, some of the early actions in the
[Guest]: Modi government, so, you know, opening up to FDI, for example, was a thing. And, you know,
[Guest]: there's the whole exit problem that we realized that, you know, remember that, you see, I think
[Guest]: this is where I think we need to be a little bit careful about history also is that the exit
[Guest]: the exit problem was first signaled in a sense by Ashish Gupta and the House of Debt reports,
[Guest]: we were seeing that that was happening, right. And of course, essentially, everyone played this
[Guest]: extended pretend strategy, because, you know, exit is very difficult in India. And that's why
[Guest]: I think capitalism that exit is a serious problem. Now, let's kind of delve. So in the early period,
[Guest]: there was definitely a sense of optimism. And let me say one thing that's a little bit, I think,
[Guest]: it kind of speaks to this, you know, reduced legitimacy of the state and markets, right.
[Guest]: So if you were to ask me, just, you know, as an outsider, as someone who, you know,
[Guest]: thinks a little bit about these things, to say, okay, how do you reverse this, you know,
[Guest]: because stigmatized capitalism is not going to go away, you know, whatever, right? It has to be
[Guest]: done consistently over time. And one, the only way you kind of reverse that is the state acquiring
[Guest]: legitimacy, right, in one sense, and state saying, we will be distant from capital. Now, in some
[Guest]: ways, you could interpret the early actions of the Modi government as going exactly in that
[Guest]: direction. Remember, the complaints that happened from business that, you know, you know, nobody
[Guest]: sees us, you know, etc, etc. That was, I think, one way of signaling that, you know, we were going
[Guest]: to, you know, put our distance with, you know, crony capital. I mean, people would say it wasn't
[Guest]: uniform and so on. But anyway, but at least the at least the overt signal was, you know,
[Guest]: we are going to be distant. And then on the other side, and this is where I think this, in my view,
[Guest]: was one of the major, you know, partial achievements of the government, which I think
[Guest]: needs to think, is that, and this is what I think is the distinctive brand of the new welfarism
[Guest]: of the Prime Minister. Now, remember, the old welfarism is, you know, you have to, you know,
[Guest]: give these, you know, all the handouts, you know, I mean, I'm just caricaturing here, handouts,
[Guest]: you know, PDS, Monrega, whatever, you do the handouts. But the Modi brand of the new welfarism
[Guest]: was, as I call it in my book, the public provision of essential private goods and services, right?
[Guest]: It's, it's not a handout. So that's distinctive. It's not health and education. So it's not
[Guest]: providing public goods. And I'll explain for reasons why I think that was the case. But it's
[Guest]: the public provision of private goods, essential goods, you know, power, toilets, bank accounts,
[Guest]: and then more recently, water, and there are a couple of others. So essentially, the logic is,
[Guest]: if you step back, is that the state regains legitimacy by delivering these things effectively.
[Guest]: So you regain the trust to be able to do the other things. And I'm going to give you an example of
[Guest]: that. And use it, you know, by leveraging the new technology. And that's what this old jam thing
[Guest]: came in, you know, Jaddan Aadhaar mobile, which, you know, the coin phrase that, you know, we coined
[Guest]: in the economic survey early on. So in some sense, the combination of, look, early on, so to put some
[Guest]: kind of method on that initial period, there's a Sudbhut Sarkar overhang, right? So we cannot do,
[Guest]: remember, and remember, this is people forget, the first opportunity to reform happened on coal,
[Guest]: when the Supreme Court said, you know, you can, you know, remember that in I think August of 2014,
[Guest]: before I joined government, the early opportunity to reform coal was there, you know, the Supreme
[Guest]: Court came down in favor, but I think the government chose not to. So that was a Sudbhut
[Guest]: Sarkar because, you know, you don't want to be thing. But, you know, we distance ourselves from
[Guest]: capital. And we embark on this to regain the legitimacy of the state. And that's the new
[Guest]: welfarism, the public provision of private goods and services. Then we come to the capitalism
[Guest]: without exit. So here's a problem, very evidence becoming bigger and bigger. And, you know, in 2014,
[Guest]: 2015, you know, many of us pointed this out. And, you know, of course, the wanted to the bad bank,
[Guest]: the early attempt to grapple with this exit problem. Now, the problem, stigmatized capitalism
[Guest]: and capitalism without exit come together, because in order to exit, right, you have to do haircuts,
[Guest]: you have to, you know, do these things. And Sudbhut Sarkar means that no public official,
[Guest]: no thing is going to be, you know, in the business of doing this haircuts, because,
[Guest]: you know, immediately the allegation of crony capitalism would be alleged. And so, instead of
[Guest]: a quick, expedited, executive led process, and this is what I wrote in my piece yesterday on Mr.
[Guest]: Jaitley as well. Therefore, you know, it was a really a pass the buck strategy to a judicial
[Guest]: process. Luckily, you know, the IBC had been passed. And, you know, they said, let's pass the
[Guest]: buck to the judicial process. And that's where I think the whole Sudbhut Sarkar once again,
[Guest]: came in the way of, you know, those decisions of, you know, we could have done it quicker,
[Guest]: faster, but it would require some political courage. But then we opted for this judicial
[Guest]: process. And, you know, we know what's happened on this judicial process. It's once again,
[Guest]: run up against all these things. But the point is that, I think, over the course of the government
[Guest]: of this tenure, you know, at least the hope and the expectation was that accumulate enough
[Guest]: legitimacy by doing these other things, which are good in themselves. I mean, you know, after all,
[Guest]: provision of toilets, you know, nobody talked about toilets, you know, toilets, you know,
[Guest]: whatever is really the way to you gain the legitimacy that gives you the political space
[Guest]: to do the other things. So my own reading is that, you know, the corporate tax cut, for example,
[Guest]: is an example of, you know, because discussions of this happened early on. And there was no way
[Guest]: the corporate tax cut would have happened early on, because Sudbhut Sarkar, you come in and you
[Guest]: do the corporate tax cut, you know, this is just, you know, UPA2, but in a more legitimate way.
[Guest]: But then, you know, again, of course, there was, you know, challenging times, near crisis,
[Guest]: corporate taxes were done. But I do think that at that stage, the kind of confidence and courage to
[Guest]: do something that was explicitly pro capital came also because of having some accumulated,
[Guest]: some goodwill, some legitimacy and so on. So I think that's how I understand the process
[Guest]: by the way. And so, and of course, also the early hope that, you know, the government attracted a
[Guest]: lot of FDI, the GST happened, the IBC happened, this whole, you know, the new welfarism. So in
[Guest]: some ways, there was almost you could, you know, post facto, intellectualize this and say, look,
[Guest]: there was a kind of coherent thing. But then, of course, you know, things have turned out the way
[Amit Varma]: they have for various reasons. Yeah, no, that's extremely insightful. And I have a couple of
[Amit Varma]: follow up questions on that. Before we, you know, dive into your tenure as a CEA, one question that
[Amit Varma]: sort of strikes me, and this is also, you know, one of the chapter titles in your excellent book
[Amit Varma]: of counsel, where, you know, you write about the relationship of the state to the individual,
[Amit Varma]: and I want to sort of discuss this particular point, not with reference to your own role within
[Amit Varma]: role within the government or within this government at all, but just at the realm of
[Amit Varma]: ideas, where it strikes me that when you speak about the relationship between the state and the
[Amit Varma]: individual sort of shifting, it seems to be shifting in a sense of better directed paternalism
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, you know, we'll do provision of these private goods, we'll use jam, which is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: gender and accounts and other and mobile, and we'll, you know, we'll do all of this much more efficiently.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we'll be legitimacy. And I kind of get that, but the mindset is still a paternalistic
[Amit Varma]: one, it's saying will be paternalistic in a more efficient way. And what sort of the directional
[Amit Varma]: shift, which, you know, I crave to see, and I don't know how much of that we've seen, perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: since the watch by government is a shift towards, you know, empowering people to help themselves.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, markets are a mechanism through which, you know, society solves its own problems. That's
[Amit Varma]: how I've always seen them. And yet, you know, we've gained the ease of doing business ratings a
[Amit Varma]: little bit, but it hasn't really improved. You know, I have so many friends who are who run
[Amit Varma]: factories and who run businesses. And of course, this is anecdotal from my experience, but many of
[Amit Varma]: them are viscerally devastated and not now because of COVID or whatever, but you know, over the last
[Amit Varma]: few years. So that's kind of one question where I have a little skepticism that if I want the
[Amit Varma]: relationship between the state and the individual defined, I would like it defined in terms of
[Amit Varma]: empowering individuals more to help themselves, which is what markets do, rather than, you know,
[Amit Varma]: more directed paternalism. And my other question, also, the thought that kind of struck me is
[Amit Varma]: something that you articulated while you were talking about it, when you spoke about the
[Amit Varma]: post facto nature of, you know, giving a direction to all of this, where what you know, you were
[Amit Varma]: speaking about that, okay, the state needs to improve its legitimacy. We can't do XYZ, like
[Amit Varma]: corporate tax cuts, because of stigmatized capitalism, how do we improve legitimacy,
[Amit Varma]: let's provide, you know, private services better and all of that. And all of that sounds very
[Amit Varma]: logical. But looking from the outside in, if one looks at our politics, you know, one, the leaders
[Amit Varma]: in charge don't seem the kind of people who would think it through in this kind of manner. Rather,
[Amit Varma]: you've had sort of a haphazard ad hoc mix of policies going in different directions and
[Amit Varma]: catering to different incentives, most of them political. And also, the fact of the matter is
[Amit Varma]: that, and we'll, you know, discuss a work that you did as CEA, and I loved your economic surveys,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, and how closely you work with Mr. Jaitley. But it seems that a lot, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there were key decisions like demonetization, in which even Mr. Jaitley wasn't, you know,
[Amit Varma]: too instrumental, or couldn't do much about it. So I'm just wondering that how much of this is
[Amit Varma]: sort of looking back and rationalizing the things that happened? Or at the time, is this something
[Amit Varma]: that people actually thought that, you know, you had cabinet meetings where you discussed it, okay,
[Amit Varma]: we need to first increase our legitimacy as a state. So let's do XYZ. And later, we'll do future
[Amit Varma]: reforms. Was there thinking like that? And if there was, why did that then get derailed?
[Guest]: Very, very probing and good questions. Let's come back to first, you know, the whole mindset issue,
[Guest]: the state and the individual, right? See, I think, in a country like India,
[Guest]: given this whole legacy, where, you know, it's all state, state, state, and, you know,
[Guest]: the process is one of, you know, kind of the Leviathan being slowly, slowly on, taken off
[Guest]: the back. And this is where I think the failure of the state to equip every Indian with the basic
[Guest]: human capital to, you know, kind of, you know, then, you know, it's a completely unlevel playing
[Guest]: field unless so. So in some ways, if you haven't done that basic, which is what by the way, China
[Guest]: did that very early on, the Chinese Communist Party did that early on. And so in that sense,
[Guest]: that original sin having been committed, I think all these, you know, notions that, you know,
[Guest]: the individual should be left to the market, etc., you know, they become less, I think,
[Guest]: meaningful, or at least the discussion of that has to be qualified by the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: you haven't provided no health and education. I mean, you know, I'm doing some research with
[Guest]: Devesh Kapoor on this. I mean, if you look at, you know, stunting and heights and everything in
[Guest]: India, you know, you think, you know, that, you know, or if you look at, you know, the ASAR results
[Guest]: on, on learning outcomes, and so on. So if those two key ingredients are so badly under provided,
[Guest]: and also so asymmetrically provided between, you know, the vast mass and things, then the whole,
[Guest]: you know, capitalism as an equal opportunity space where people thrive, I think that discussion just
[Amit Varma]: becomes much more difficult. So, can I button here, you know, I hear this observation often
[Amit Varma]: from people who support statism, which I know you're not doing, but I hear this argument often,
[Amit Varma]: and I feel it that it's a little bit self-serving. For example, in education, you don't allow private
[Amit Varma]: enterprise, you don't allow for profit education. So therefore, you know, we remain underserved and
[Amit Varma]: undereducated. And then you say that, listen, they are not getting educated, the state has to do it.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you know, you sort of justify the role of the state by saying that it isn't going
[Amit Varma]: to happen otherwise, but you're not allowing it to happen otherwise. And this seems to me to be
[Amit Varma]: an unfortunate situation that can then, you know, just continue in this vicious circle.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think that's, I mean, that's a fair point about, you know, how much
[Guest]: the, you know, I don't know the sector well enough, you know, you had people who
[Guest]: know much more on this, I do. But I think all I think is important to notice, whether it's
[Guest]: it's an act of omission or commission, and you're saying it's also a sin of commission, not just
[Guest]: a sin of omission. I think the fact is that, you know, once you have individuals who are not equipped
[Guest]: to take advantage of opportunities, it's that's what the second thing I think is that, you know,
[Guest]: the state as regulator, because remember, we can't have, you know, no one thinks that a market
[Guest]: economy, you know, almost everything should be done by the private sector, obviously, but,
[Guest]: you know, certain basic things like health, maybe health education, along with this, but also some
[Guest]: amount of, you know, reasonable regulation has to be there, right. But I think, so the failure in
[Guest]: the last few years has also been that in the last decade or so, is that the state as a regulator,
[Guest]: I think, has become a very problematic thing, you know, both, you know, the undercapacity,
[Guest]: the lack of thing, and of course, the capture on the other side from the usual thing. So I think
[Guest]: you've had, you have both sets of problems. And therefore, you know, so on the one hand, you say,
[Guest]: you know, yes, we believe in, you know, markets with things, but the essential wherewithal,
[Guest]: you know, 90% doesn't have the wherewithal. And then post facto, you know, it's kind of,
[Guest]: you can't have a marketplace where, you know, you know, firms can pollute, firms can be corrupt,
[Guest]: you know, firms can do. So I think in some ways, we're kind of stuck, right, neither at the
[Guest]: ex ante stage, nor the ex post stage, you have that thing. And then we say, you know, whatever.
[Guest]: So it really is. And I say, you know, I think there are just so many things that the state just
[Guest]: should not be doing. I mean, you know, state in telecom, you know, as a provider, I mean,
[Guest]: state should not be a provider for almost, you know, everything except a few core things, right,
[Guest]: but the state needs. So ex ante exposed to have such a weak state, and then you have a kind of
[Guest]: over-accrucive state on all this, you know, just this, you know, starting a business,
[Guest]: I completely agree with you. I don't know whether you saw that, you know, I saw this on Twitter,
[Guest]: you know, how many approvals you still need to start, you know, a small business. So it's like
[Guest]: a triple whammy, you know, you don't have the wherewithal, the post facto regulations thing,
[Guest]: and you have this thing. And so it's a very fair question as to, you know,
[Guest]: why on all of these, we haven't changed. By the way, on the regulatory side, there was a period,
[Guest]: you know, in the early 2000s, where I feel there was some hope that we could get, you know,
[Guest]: very effective regulation. I think the early try, for example, was actually doing quite well.
[Guest]: And somehow there too, you know, the whole regulatory state has become less, I mean,
[Guest]: I think even the RBI, for example, you know, you've got so many, you know, it's a wonderful
[Guest]: and highly respected, deservedly respected institution. But all these, you know, things
[Guest]: that have happened, partly it's because I think partly kind of Urjit Patel's point, partly it's
[Guest]: because of public ownership, because there, the regulator has less say. But partly it's also
[Guest]: because, you know, in the areas where the regulator has freedom, we've not been able to,
[Guest]: I mean, to have a series of scandals like this in a financial system, I mean, is part overbearing
[Guest]: state, but part also kind of weak regulation. So I think that, you know, when we think about
[Guest]: therefore, and that is why now coming to the last point on the state and the individual,
[Guest]: and we can talk about that in terms of the ideas that, you know, we were associated with when I
[Guest]: was in government. I do think, therefore, that, you know, a UBI, something like a universal basic
[Guest]: income, it's kind of says, look, you know, that minimum wherewithal for you to survive,
[Guest]: not fall into poverty, not be subject to the vicissitudes of health and education shocks,
[Guest]: etc. You know, we provide you that wherewithal. And that allows them, you know, the kind of your
[Guest]: agenda that you have for the state to kind of, you know, get away from the over-obtrusiveness.
[Guest]: I think that's why ideas like UBI, for me, resonate a lot, because they're very valuable
[Guest]: in themselves in terms of this whole what we want social protection to be. And that's why
[Guest]: I remember UBI is something that both the right and the left like for very different reasons.
[Guest]: But it also allows you to kind of not burden the price system, you know, the efficiency cost that
[Guest]: the price system has to bear for providing redistribution. That's where ideas like that
[Guest]: matter. Now, we'll come to your questions about, you know, post facto rationalization versus,
[Guest]: you know, in real time, you know, do you actually have discussions like this that say, look,
[Guest]: we've had stigmatized capitalism, you know, look, I mean, something that came up in your
[Guest]: discussion with Pratap as well. I think, for me, one of the fascinating, you know,
[Guest]: things about being in government is just, you know, getting a glimpse into, you know,
[Guest]: personalities and how, you know, personalities really and their, you know, deeper psychology,
[Guest]: you know, can be so important in driving these things. You know, nobody ever studies it,
[Guest]: nobody is going to, you know, write about it, because there's so many kind of, but I think it's
[Guest]: undeniable. But I think on this thing about the fact that the provision can reclaim legitimacy,
[Guest]: I think was actually, I have no evidence, whatever, but just observing, I think one could,
[Guest]: even in real time, get a sense of that, even in real time. So, I wouldn't say it's all post
[Guest]: facto rationalization. There was a, I think we have to, you know, some stage credit leaders with,
[Guest]: you know, at least some leaders with a sense of, you know, being driven by, you know, obviously,
[Guest]: they're driven by all the, you know, sordid things that politics is all about. But also,
[Guest]: I think there are, I think, deeper things that drive and I think this trying to overcome
[Guest]: stigmatized capitalism, recognizing that what does one need to offset, I think there were,
[Guest]: there was, I couldn't get a sense of that, you know, at least in the early years that I was there.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the sort of your personal experience as a CEA, which, you know, I have a
[Amit Varma]: lot of questions on that. And I find that sort of that whole experience you must have had very
[Amit Varma]: fascinating. But before that, another sort of question in the realm of ideas, because you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned the UBI, and I was going to kind of come to that later, which is that, and I also
[Amit Varma]: simultaneously want to bring up the GST in this context, which is that there are often ideas,
[Amit Varma]: which seem to us from a purely conceptual point of view, that, oh, these are, you know, so brilliant,
[Amit Varma]: this is why they'll make such a great difference. This is why they make sense. And all of that,
[Amit Varma]: like GST, for example, I was so excited to, you know, the first time I heard about a GST coming
[Amit Varma]: up. And like you said, people's views of the GST might be colored because of what happened during
[Amit Varma]: demonetization. And we'll come back to that as well. But you know, I've done an episode of the
[Amit Varma]: scene in the unseen with the journalist Zewang Sudatta, where he pointed out and this was before
[Amit Varma]: the GST was passed. And he pointed out quite recently, all the things that could go wrong
[Amit Varma]: with the GST. And as it turns out, I think they did go wrong. Like, when I think of the GST,
[Amit Varma]: I think of something now, and this is in hindsight, and obviously post facto, that it's something that
[Amit Varma]: is a phenomenal idea. It's a necessary idea, you want to reduce the friction of so many taxes,
[Amit Varma]: and you want something much more simplified. But at the same time, it was perhaps foreseeable,
[Amit Varma]: and even foreseen by others, what problems would come, many of these were unavoidable,
[Amit Varma]: they were part of the political economy, like the multiple rates and the exemptions and the
[Amit Varma]: different interest groups fighting all the way and the discretion to the lowest level tax officer,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, frankly, I'm at sort of that end of the economy, where so many of my friends are
[Amit Varma]: the receiving end of what I can only describe as tax terrorism. And you know, one of my friends
[Amit Varma]: actually is a manufacturer runs a couple of small factories. And he keeps telling me that
[Amit Varma]: dude, GST was far worse for us and demonetization was. So I asked him to send me some pointers of
[Amit Varma]: what went wrong with it. And I'll quickly read through them. He talks about how compliance was
[Amit Varma]: much more expensive and tedious, and they now have to have additional full time employees,
[Amit Varma]: a consultant to make sure they're not in violation. The confusion of the initial
[Amit Varma]: months costs them actual real money in loss transfers from the old system. The rules and
[Amit Varma]: the guidelines keep changing, there is confusion is KitKat, a biscuit or a chocolate, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: more tellingly, that a number of small vendors that he used to work with simply shut down because
[Amit Varma]: they were not able to survive in the new regime that was sort of the transaction cost of shifting
[Amit Varma]: from one regime to another and the cash locked up in the system has made doing business more
[Amit Varma]: expensive. And even for me, I have to file my, you know, GST every month and a fair amount of
[Amit Varma]: time goes to it. Now, I'm not asking you to address any of these specifically. My larger point
[Amit Varma]: here is that, you know, in their excellent book, in service of the Republic, Vijay Kelkar and Ajay
[Amit Varma]: Shah made the point that given Indian state capacity, we should have presumptive laissez faire,
[Amit Varma]: which is a separate point. But the larger sense there is that whatever policies that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we think about, we should think about in the context of what they call how much state capacity
[Amit Varma]: is there. But what I would think of is not just state capacity, because it might be state capacity
[Amit Varma]: to implement a lot of this. But also what is the structure of the state? Like, when I look at the
[Amit Varma]: structure of the state with regard to taxation, it seems to me that it is by and large predatory and
[Amit Varma]: parasitic, that where I mean, tax terrorism is a very real term. So the larger question, I'm sorry
[Amit Varma]: if I've rambled a bit, but and the reason I thought of this in the context of UBI is that when you
[Amit Varma]: think about policies, and even by the way, people who worked on the IBC, the bankruptcy court tell
[Amit Varma]: me that it is stuck in various places, because state capacity hasn't kept up with it, though
[Amit Varma]: obviously, overall, it's a net benefit that we have that reform in place. And we have that on the
[Amit Varma]: books. So now, my question is that when we sort of implement policies is one of the things that we
[Amit Varma]: should take into account, not only sort of how it is intended to work, but how given what our state
[Amit Varma]: is actually like, and our structures are actually like how it will actually work. So to me, it seems
[Amit Varma]: that for example, this is where a lot of GST went wrong and did damage. And one could argue that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, in the long run, it'll work out fine, but it did a lot of short term damage. And similarly,
[Amit Varma]: with UBI, I could say that, you know, the UBI with the way you write about it and present it,
[Amit Varma]: and others do as well, it obviously, you know, it makes fiscal sense in all your projections,
[Amit Varma]: where you talk about, okay, we'll cut all these subsidies, and we'll cut all these hazard things
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But in the real time political economy, which is dominated by so many different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of interests and political compulsions, many of those are not going to go. And this will
[Amit Varma]: eventually the UBI will also eventually become, if it comes into being a sort of very perverted
[Amit Varma]: populist handout, which really helps nobody and has all kinds of perverse unseen consequences.
[Amit Varma]: So is this something that sort of plays a large part in how the policy making mechanism flows
[Guest]: that you're actually considering sort of all of these things? See, again, very, very important
[Guest]: kind of conceptual things that we should think about. But let me just say, just to make it come
[Guest]: alive, talk about it in the context of both GST and UBI, right? I think, in the case of the GST,
[Guest]: look, on this, I would rephrase the Kelkar-Shah thing in a little bit more, I think that they're
[Guest]: absolutely right. I would rephrase this as, you know, in the case of tax, for example, you know,
[Guest]: simple tax policy is 70% of tax administration. I mean, if you have simple policy administration
[Guest]: becomes, you know, so the complexity just makes everything worse. So in that sense, I think that
[Guest]: there is no question that we kind of went, definitely have gone excessively in the direction
[Guest]: of complexity. But just to step, to be fair to this whole process, and let me just take you back
[Guest]: to, I think the feeling at that, so remember, I wanted three, no more, you know, that was the
[Guest]: maximum, I still think we should have attempted that. But I think that the way it went, part of
[Guest]: the justification was, look, it's less complex than the previous regime. And so that was part
[Guest]: of the, so you know, you had like 15 excise duties, now we only have seven, you know, seven
[Guest]: is, I mean, so in a sense, it was, the standards kept changing, instead of the standard being,
[Guest]: look, going forward, what is the best way to maximise the system, you know, this path
[Guest]: dependence came in. Now, and this is where I certainly do think that this was something that
[Guest]: could have been avoided. The path dependence comes in, because one, you say, look, there are so many
[Guest]: excises and vats, when I change, there should be no increase in the incidence at all. I mean,
[Guest]: if that's the way, you know, your politics is going to, you know, the policymaking process
[Guest]: going to run, then you're going to get into complexity. And I think it was that. So I do
[Guest]: agree, I think that the conviction that simplicity is the way forward in itself, and also, because it
[Guest]: helps, you know, vastly helps administration, I think that conviction, I think, could have been
[Guest]: much greater. And I think that has come in the way of that. And so I think, I don't know the
[Guest]: income tax system well enough. But remember, what you said about tax terrorism, you know,
[Guest]: here's the tragedy, right? The tragedy is, you know, I'm sure what you're saying is right. And
[Guest]: I've heard the word, tax terrorism, and even the most ardent supporters of the government
[Guest]: also think that this thing. But if you look at actually the tax intake attacks to GDP ratios,
[Guest]: I mean, it's not, you know, sterling by any means. So in a sense, we kind of get the worst of all
[Guest]: possible worlds, we get the administrative thing, which really chills entrepreneurial activity and
[Guest]: whatever. And we don't get the fiscal benefits as well. So the notion that actually simple design
[Guest]: and simple administration can help both, you know, is something that I think is a kind of
[Guest]: indictment of our system, you know, for not just now, but for many, many, I mean, this is a kind
[Guest]: of a historical thing. But on the GST, let me say that, you know, again, there was always going to
[Guest]: be a short term cost. I mean, nobody was under any illusion that that was not to be the case.
[Guest]: So the question really was, you know, was there adequate preparation to minimize that cost? And
[Guest]: I think that's really a, you know, because remember, after the GST was implemented,
[Guest]: steps were taken to minimize the compliance burdens, but I think certainly, much more could
[Guest]: have been done on that. So there was, I think that that was one. And then, of course, you know,
[Guest]: GST came on top of demonetization. So, you know, some of the, you know, so that constituency
[Guest]: got a double whammy, right? I mean, the demonetization and the GST, and therefore,
[Guest]: you know, I don't know how much to separate out what is the pure GST impact and what was that.
[Guest]: Now, but there are two design features conceptually, I think that I, so I think on the
[Guest]: simplicity, I think just it we just kind of could have done better, no question about it. And I
[Guest]: think there are no real, real excuses for that. I think we should have and could have done better.
[Guest]: And also on the on the, you know, minimizing the tax, we could have done better. For me,
[Guest]: the really difficult issues were, you know, looking back, or, you know, looking forward,
[Guest]: we said, look, one market, one India. And I think, again, I don't have enough evidence,
[Guest]: but there's some at least some good evidence saying that, you know, at the border, the waiting
[Guest]: times, etc, have come down considerably. So the virtues of having one market in India,
[Guest]: I mean, those were huge. And I don't think, you know, looking back, I don't think we should,
[Guest]: you know, ignore those things. So, so I think those benefits were huge, we could have reaped more.
[Guest]: And that was what we really wanted, right? I mean, in a sense, we wanted India to be one market,
[Guest]: it's like, you know, internal liberalization, and the benefits would be huge. The price of that,
[Guest]: of course, remember, the price of that was one, this whole compensation that we say that
[Guest]: regardless, we will pay the states as a way of getting political buy-in for this. And the second
[Guest]: related point was that we knew that so the compensation was a short term thing, right?
[Guest]: You want to get political buy-in. But we knew that this one market would come at the cost of
[Guest]: loss of fiscal sovereignty for the states, right? And what the COVID crisis has shown is that,
[Guest]: you know, states have lost a lot of fiscal sovereignty, and their tax handles, as it were,
[Guest]: are now much less than they used to be. And the way we kind of justified or thought about this
[Guest]: ex ante, is that you do the compensation, you have the trust. And, you know, yes, there'll be
[Guest]: loss of sovereignty, but you know, the underlying system would be buoyant enough that you wouldn't
[Guest]: feel that much. It's not that you won't ever feel it. But you know, but that trade off, I think,
[Guest]: has started looking a little bit more tricky now. But partly, it's see, remember, partly,
[Guest]: it's kind of endogenous to the way it's been implemented. You know, my own view, as I said,
[Guest]: in the piece yesterday, is that, you know, had we preserved the trust between, you know, the
[Guest]: center and the states, I think some of these things would have been less severe. So it was
[Guest]: ex ante a calculation where we had a certain vision of politics, and how federal politics,
[Guest]: center state politics to play out, which post facto has turned out to be a little bit different
[Guest]: from what we anticipated. In fact, I have a paragraph in my book on the GST, where I say that
[Guest]: my kind of nightmare scenario for the GST is that, you know, for whatever reason, trust breaks down,
[Guest]: and then individual states say, look, you know, we disagree with the center, and we're just going
[Guest]: to go back and do our own thing, at which point the GST would be just dead. And therefore, I think,
[Guest]: you know, the practice of politics, the practice of center state politics in India,
[Guest]: is something that's absolutely critical to ensuring that because otherwise, you know,
[Guest]: kind of all bets are off. And, you know, I just hope that this will get sorted out,
[Guest]: because that that's an ingredient that I think that maybe we just, I kind of knew a little bit,
[Guest]: you know, what might happen should center state, because remember, when the GST was done,
[Guest]: you know, most of the states were aligned with the center, you know. So conceptually,
[Guest]: one did think of what would happen, you know, when the center state alignment would vary.
[Guest]: But I was just hoping that, you know, politics would evolve in a certain way. So I think these
[Guest]: were the, you know, really kind of conceptual questions about the design of the GST,
[Guest]: which I think, you know, I think about a lot more. And some of it, frankly, we did not that
[Guest]: we didn't think about any of these things earlier. But I think, you know, as the, you know,
[Guest]: as they say, stuff happens, or as Harold Macmillan famously said, events, dear boy events, you know,
[Guest]: so that's, and some of these things, you know, you can't just can't control. So that I think,
[Guest]: on the UPI, I do think that there's a very serious, you know, risk. And it is a design
[Guest]: challenge that, you know, if it just becomes one more scheme on top of every other scheme,
[Guest]: whatever. And this is a point that I think, it's a kind of theoretical, but very deep conceptual
[Guest]: point. It's a point that I think I've heard Tharman Shanmugaratnam make, in the context of
[Guest]: Singapore, he says, you know, ex ante, a desirable design feature of simplicity
[Guest]: might really be the problem post facto. And give you an illustration, right, that, so for example,
[Guest]: in labour markets, we generally have two different ways of doing things, right? You can either have
[Guest]: a minimum wage, or you have, you know, what's called an EITC, which is basically like a tax
[Guest]: credit for low income workers. I think Tharman's point was that it may be ex ante minimum wage is
[Guest]: actually a less complex policy, you don't have to mess around the tax score, you just announce
[Guest]: it, whatever. But that very feature post facto, if you get competitive populism, for example,
[Guest]: it's easier to raise the minimum, keep raising the minimum wage, than to, you know, say, you know,
[Guest]: I'm, you know, tackling some aspect of the EITC code. Similarly, there's a kind of risk with the
[Guest]: UBI. It's very simplistic, people say, you know, or you said 80 rupees a month, we will say 150
[Guest]: rupees a month. And so this is a, but you know, but, you know, in the real world, you know,
[Guest]: you can you therefore say, because of this risk, I will not contemplate UBI at all, or do you
[Guest]: struggle with saying no, I will, but let me see what are the kind of checks I can build into this
[Guest]: going forward. And that's what makes you know, politics and policymaking, you know, so bloody
[Amit Varma]: hard, but also so important and challenging. So let me get to another conceptual question now.
[Amit Varma]: But before I do, you know, what you said about stuff happens reminded me of that famous John
[Amit Varma]: Lennon quote, life is what happens to you when you're busy making other plans. And I often used
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, at an sort of individual level to tell my friends why I have, you know, written so
[Amit Varma]: few books in my life, and so on and so forth. But now you've given a new context to it of the state.
[Amit Varma]: And I sort of totally get and you know, one what I, you know, have noted in your book and in your
[Amit Varma]: writings is that that whole political maneuvering to make you know, the cooperative federalism
[Amit Varma]: happened where the center and the states work together is also miraculous. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: an entire episode would not suffice to talk about that, because that's also quite phenomenal. And
[Amit Varma]: also, it's undoubted that, you know, I remember in Mahir Sharma's book restart, he had an anecdote
[Amit Varma]: about how if you have to send a truck full of goods from two cities, I forget which one two
[Amit Varma]: of Madras, Bangalore, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad, but from one to the other, rather than
[Amit Varma]: go over state borders, it's it's cheaper to send it to Paris and then have it sent to the other
[Amit Varma]: city from there. And that's obviously one of the things that, you know, GST would have eliminated.
[Amit Varma]: But my larger conceptual question is there is that you were talking about trade offs and cost
[Amit Varma]: and benefit and so on. And this is something that I thought about at the time of demonetization,
[Amit Varma]: when costs and benefits were touted. And I of course, you know, wrote against demonetization
[Amit Varma]: from day one, I thought it was a largest assault on property rights in human history. And it sort
[Amit Varma]: of seemed to me that when we talk of cost and benefits in that context, and it became stark
[Amit Varma]: in the context of demonetization, but I guess this is an inevitable part of public policy making
[Amit Varma]: anywhere that when you talk of costs and benefits, you are talking about cost to one set of people
[Amit Varma]: at one point in time, and benefits to another set of people at another point in time. And in the
[Amit Varma]: case of demonetization, obviously, to, you know, the cost is so large to so many people and the
[Amit Varma]: benefits are, you know, dubious and invisible, that it seems beyond question. So let's not discuss
[Amit Varma]: it in the context of demonetization. But in the context of any public policy, whether it is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, GST or whatever, we often have to deal with trade offs where one set of people get costs
[Amit Varma]: and another set of people get benefits. And it seems to me to be a sort of a danger to watch
[Amit Varma]: out for what Hayek would have called the fatal conceit almost that you can sort of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: treat these people as pieces on a chessboard. And you can just sort of plan out that, okay,
[Amit Varma]: I lose my night here, but I get a checkmate there. But these are real people, these are individuals
[Amit Varma]: who also deserve to have their autonomy respected. And at the same time, these trade offs are
[Amit Varma]: inevitable, you can't get around them in most public policy. So is this something that you
[Amit Varma]: think about? And then how do you guard against the kind of arrogance that might come, for example,
[Amit Varma]: from being in the state and having all these power over the lives of chess pieces as a court?
[Guest]: So, you know, you said, let's talk of it, you know, outside the context of demonetization,
[Guest]: let me make it easier, more interesting. So let me talk, let's talk about in the context of
[Guest]: demonetization. So one of the pieces that I'm, you know, kind of proudest of having written
[Guest]: is on the political economy of demonetization in my book, you know, here, I don't want to get
[Guest]: into controversy and talk about, you know, good, bad, did I know, did someone else know, you know,
[Guest]: all of that. But to me, it was just the most fascinating experience of political economy.
[Guest]: And let me, you know, kind of, you know, because you've thought about it,
[Guest]: maybe you can, you know, tell me why I'm completely wrong. You see, think about,
[Guest]: think about this, about demonetization, right? It also speaks to your question about autonomy
[Guest]: of respecting autonomy, and so on. And I don't even know how to, you know, given what I've seen,
[Guest]: I don't even know how to think about these things anymore, right? That I think everyone would have
[Guest]: agreed with you. And you know, that there would be a lot of short term costs on a lot of people,
[Guest]: right? Maybe there was some, you know, potential long term benefits, whatever. And, you know,
[Guest]: that's how it would play out. And therefore, you know, both because there were a lot of people
[Guest]: affected. It was quite, you know, significant. And, you know, the gains were more tenuous and
[Guest]: long term. So political economy would tell you that this would be a vastly unpopular policy.
[Guest]: I mean, this is, you know, when we think about, you know, political economy, we say that,
[Guest]: you know, even in the context of trade policy, we say, you know, if the losers are concentrated,
[Guest]: the gainers are diffused, even though aggregated may be greater, the concentrated losers,
[Guest]: I think, sure, it was not even concentrated losers, it was, you know, the vast majority,
[Guest]: and yet revealed preference, you know, I don't want to draw to, but I think generally,
[Guest]: we would say that what happened in the UP election afterwards, was certainly not a reaction against,
[Guest]: if anything, it was maybe not a validation, but certainly, relative to a prior that it should
[Guest]: have had a huge impact, it did not have that impact. So at least that, so I'm trying to still
[Guest]: trying to understand why that is the case, you know, it's a complete political economy puzzle.
[Guest]: It's a little bit like, you know, in the in the US and others, even now, people are asking,
[Guest]: you know, what's wrong with Kansas? Why do, you know, white, poor white middle class voters
[Guest]: vote for an administration that, you know, threatens to take away the welfare benefits,
[Guest]: provides tax cuts, which you're not benefiting at all, you know, how do you explain this, you know,
[Guest]: people voting against their apparent self interest? Of course, there are arguments about
[Guest]: identity here, and so on. But then, I mean, you know, it's like, 80 90%, very badly hit,
[Guest]: you know, and the intensity you can see, and yet they turn out and, you know, behave a certain way.
[Guest]: So how do you explain this? And more and more, I think about it, I think of these huge costs of
[Guest]: demonetization as a feature, not a bug, in political terms. And so that's why this autumn,
[Guest]: so it's like, you know, it had to be, you know, a cost inflicted on a lot of people. And my
[Guest]: explanation for this, you know, ideas, you're not a thing. One is that, you know, you have to feel
[Guest]: the pain for you to be convinced that it's a kind of, you know, really important policy. It has to
[Guest]: be widespread in its impact, because otherwise, you know, the charge that it was selected,
[Guest]: because remember, the puzzle of demonetization is, why did so many people have to be hit in order
[Guest]: for these benefits? You know, if you really wanted to, you know, go after the rich, you have
[Guest]: selective policy instruments to go after the rich, you don't have to have take a huge swipe at so
[Guest]: many people, you know, because you can do tax raids, you can, you know, you raise taxes. So
[Guest]: you have selective instruments. But this was a conscious policy to use a bludgeon of an instrument,
[Guest]: you know, for some political and it worked. So that's the puzzle that because remember,
[Guest]: the other thing in this was, it's interesting, right, that, you know, many people said, just
[Guest]: do that. Why was the 500 rupee note all done by also the 1000? Because after all, with a 500
[Guest]: rupee note, you're more likely to hit more poor people, because, you know, relative to the gains.
[Guest]: So there was this puzzle about this. And, you know, my explanation for it is that, you know,
[Guest]: it had to be huge, because then it's like Thomas Schelling said, you know, in a strategy of conflict,
[Guest]: to show that you're doing something big, it's credible that it has to be costly, you can't do
[Guest]: things on the cheap. So it's like situating your nuclear shelter right in the middle of the city,
[Guest]: because you show that, you know, that's a credible commitment. So the inflicting of the huge cost
[Guest]: was part of that. The fact that it was uniform was to prevent against any allegation of corruption.
[Guest]: And then, of course, maybe you tap into this notion that you want to sacrifice for a larger
[Guest]: good. But in that sense, what is one therefore to make of it that, you know, you say that,
[Guest]: you know, you should respect autonomy, especially if you're inflicting, but the politician says,
[Guest]: I have respected it. See, this is the proof.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so I kind of have some related thoughts on that. First of all, I enjoyed your chapter
[Amit Varma]: on demonetization and off council very much. And in fact, the whole book is fabulous. I think
[Amit Varma]: all my listeners should pick it up. And you raised a couple of interesting questions there. And I'll
[Amit Varma]: share my thoughts on that. I won't say I'm answering them. But I'll just share my thoughts.
[Amit Varma]: One is yes, the political benefit at the time blew me away, because I thought they would lose
[Amit Varma]: every district in UP. And instead, it was a landslide, right. And my sort of couple of
[Amit Varma]: post facto explanations that come to mind and yours are also excellent, and I'll process them
[Amit Varma]: over time. And one was, of course, the explanation of schadenfreude that the poor didn't mind,
[Amit Varma]: because they also saw that it's suffering. The other is that I think that Indians have such an
[Amit Varma]: ingrained state of fatalism, that when bad things happen to them, they don't necessarily ascribe it
[Amit Varma]: to the state because the state has been a constant failure over the last 70 something years, as
[Amit Varma]: Landbridge had called it, it's a flailing state. So that sense of fatalism kind of takes you
[Amit Varma]: through but at some level, it doesn't matter what the explanation for this is. The point is that
[Amit Varma]: you're absolutely right. It was a political benefit for them. I would perhaps dispute and
[Amit Varma]: you would maybe have more better insider information. But I don't know how much intent
[Amit Varma]: there was behind this. My sense of this is that Mr. Modi genuinely thought that this will solve
[Amit Varma]: the problem of black money. And because he has not bought anything from a store in the last 20
[Amit Varma]: years, he probably didn't realize that 500 rupee notes are, you know, something that are in everyday
[Amit Varma]: use. And he must have thought is only for storing black money under beds or whatever. And my sense
[Amit Varma]: was that they actually believed that it would work. And it so happened to work out in a way that
[Amit Varma]: it politically benefited them. The other question that you raised that I don't have a convincing
[Amit Varma]: answer for is that while you showed that it did hit the economy, you point out that it does not
[Amit Varma]: seem to have hit the economy as badly as some people said it would when people spoke of a
[Amit Varma]: contraction of eight, 9%, and all of that. And to be honest, I myself, you know, overestimated the
[Amit Varma]: damage it would do according to the data. And that is, you know, going to bring me down to a later
[Amit Varma]: question that so when we know that so much of India is informal sector, and a lot of the data
[Amit Varma]: on how the informal sector is stuff that we get by proxies, you know, how reliable is that data
[Amit Varma]: and you know, how much can we sort of taken into account, but that still doesn't answer sort of the
[Amit Varma]: core conceptual question, that even if the politicians knew that we will make them suffer,
[Amit Varma]: and we will win votes at the end of it, it still doesn't justify causing suffering. And that dilemma
[Amit Varma]: still remains that how can how do we talk about costs and benefits at a time where the costs go
[Amit Varma]: to one set of people at one time and the benefits to another, like how does one sort of resolve this
[Amit Varma]: and where does one draw the line, saying that no matter what the costs are, this is where we draw
[Amit Varma]: the line, the cost will not exceed these like, can one think about these? Yeah, yeah. So again,
[Guest]: Amit, I'm going to first take you up on, you've raised a number of questions. So I have them. So
[Guest]: three things, one on the demonetization, one on the data, and then on the broader justifying this
[Guest]: thing. Okay, all three. On the Schadenfreude thing, as I said, remember that I don't fully
[Guest]: buy the Schadenfreude, because you have selective instruments, if you want to make sure that you're,
[Guest]: you know, want to go after the rich, you can do it. And I mean, why should I suffer to inflict,
[Guest]: you know, that's kind of a mystery, right? So that I think, the fatalism point, you know,
[Guest]: it may be true. But you know, Amit, the point is that, you know, even Milind Vaishnav and others
[Guest]: have done something that certainly there was a period in the 2000s, where we felt that, you know,
[Guest]: there is a kind of law of Indian politics that, you know, there's anti-incumbency that, you know,
[Guest]: whatever, you know, no matter what happens, that's not inconsistent with the fatalism argument.
[Guest]: But we did see for a period, you know, good performance being, you know, validated in the
[Guest]: polls, you know, you know, we, you know, whether it was in Madhya Pradesh, Shivraj Chauhan or the
[Guest]: re-election in Odisha, you know, there was a period where, so the whole fatalism thing,
[Guest]: it may be true in some times, but it does beg the question of why it's also not true in other times.
[Guest]: On intent, of course, what do I know? Who knows what intent was? But, you know, I think there are
[Guest]: signs here and there that we can pick up. I think the 500 rupee note, I think that there was input
[Guest]: showing that, you know, the 500 rupee note, there must have been input that, you know,
[Guest]: 500 and 1000 are very different in terms of things. And if you look at some timing of these things,
[Guest]: so I think you can't, you know, I don't know intent is finally, but certainly, you know,
[Guest]: I think there was some, maybe some intent, but certainly in terms of consequence,
[Guest]: I think the whole thing. Now, on the impact on the economy, I've been surprised as well.
[Guest]: So it is certainly true that some of the impact is not picked up in the data. And I think we
[Guest]: should completely think, but I think even allowing for that, you know, the impact turned out to be
[Guest]: less than we thought. And, you know, there's also a recent paper by, you know, the IMF chief
[Guest]: economist Geeta Gopinath saying that. But for me, the most surprising aspect of this, which,
[Guest]: you know, we wrote about, you know, Josh Feldman and I wrote about in that 2019 paper about the
[Guest]: slowdown, even pre-COVID. I think what I think we didn't fully anticipate was, remember,
[Guest]: demonetization, one angle on that, look, again, this is not, I'm not taking any stand justifying
[Guest]: or not, this is a much broader question. But it did lead to a de facto financialization of savings,
[Guest]: you know, kind of the money under the carpet coming out, which then led to, you know,
[Guest]: the mutual funds, etc. So in 18, you know, I think 17, 18, there was a period when the economy had a
[Guest]: bit of a mini boom, as it were, partially fueled by the financialization of the savings, and some
[Guest]: of that going into lending to real estate and so on. So this was against some kind of not completely
[Guest]: anticipated consequence. So in that sense, demonetization, you know, when someone does a
[Guest]: kind of dispassionate economic analysis of this, you know, five, seven years, I think it's going
[Guest]: to be, you know, whatever all this, not taking away from the fact that the costs were huge.
[Guest]: Now, you come to this, you know, how do you justify this, right? You see, I think, you know,
[Guest]: the great moral philosopher and intellectual of our time, Donald Rumsfeld once said, you know,
[Guest]: you go to bat with the, you know, army you have war with or not the army you wish you had.
[Guest]: So, you know, when you talk about, you know, how do you justify this? You are, Amit, if I may say so,
[Guest]: you are coming dangerously close to a framework that you actually don't, that you would disavow
[Guest]: completely. Because, you know, it's not as if, you know, you can do meta, go meta over and say,
[Guest]: you know, some meta entity says, this is justified, this is not justified. You know,
[Guest]: in these things, by definition, these are judgments that are made through democratic politics. And
[Guest]: therefore, you know, in some sense, these validations come from within this, from within
[Guest]: the system, not by, you know, a planner or a moral planner, you know, that Amit should be completely
[Guest]: against because he's against, you know, the conceit of the regular planner. So in that sense,
[Guest]: so all you can do is, therefore, you know, in democratic politics, you know, the different,
[Guest]: you know, constituencies have to have the kind of, you know, say and influence and power in
[Guest]: democratic politics, because finally, that's what you work with, you know, you can't kind of go
[Guest]: above a system, you know, whether it is ideas or interests, I think you have to, I think,
[Guest]: and, you know, that's the sense in which I think you should read, there's a very nice piece by
[Guest]: Jean Drez about two years ago, you know, it is this thing about who decides and for whom,
[Guest]: and, you know, and therefore, you know, how do you ensure that the poorest in this case,
[Guest]: as you yourself said, a lot of poor people got affected, you know, you know, they were suffering
[Guest]: from some grand false consciences of Marx and, you know, went and voted in a particular manner,
[Guest]: but how do you protect them in the process? I mean, they have to be empowered, you know,
[Guest]: so it's basically you come back to saying, how can democratic representative politics
[Guest]: be much better done? Because only then do you get these better decisions being made,
[Guest]: because you go to bat with democratic politics, not with some, you know,
[Guest]: meta welfare system of decision making.
[Amit Varma]: So that's a fantastic answer. And it kind of addresses my query completely, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I buy the fact that, you know, we are, my statement was not an absolutist statement
[Amit Varma]: that, oh, look at the costs, and we should not do this. I recognize that even in doing nothing,
[Amit Varma]: there are costs and benefits. So you are making a choice no matter what you do,
[Amit Varma]: especially when you have the sort of coercive power of the state with you, which can bring us
[Amit Varma]: to another question, which perhaps we'll leave for some other day before we go to a commercial
[Amit Varma]: break, and then come back to talk about your time as CEA. But the other question that it then leads
[Amit Varma]: to is that even within the democratic system, where you're juggling different interests or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, where do you draw the line? Where do you draw the line and say that no, the costs are
[Amit Varma]: too much here? And, you know, is that something that you simply let interest decide? Or is there
[Amit Varma]: some other compass or some other set of rules that can guide that? Because, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: is that famous cartoon about two wolves and a lamb debating what to have for dinner, and one
[Amit Varma]: of them says, let's put it to the vote. So there's also sort of a danger there. Let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. And then we come back, we shall leave India for just a moment and visit Machu Picchu.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and The Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the show
[Amit Varma]: alive. The Scene and The Unseen has been a labor of love for me. I've enjoyed putting together many
[Amit Varma]: stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Scene and The Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken up
[Amit Varma]: to the insane engagement level of podcasts. And I do many, many hours of deep research for each
[Amit Varma]: episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests, booking studios,
[Amit Varma]: paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going.
[Amit Varma]: And that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every episode of The Scene and The
[Amit Varma]: Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel is worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of your
[Amit Varma]: choice. This is not a subscription. The Scene and The Unseen will continue to be free on all
[Amit Varma]: podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in. This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep this thing
[Amit Varma]: going. sceneunseen.in slash support. Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen. I'm chatting with
[Amit Varma]: Arvind Subramaniam. And finally, after two hours of digressions and talking about ideas and concepts
[Amit Varma]: and so on, I'm delighted that I've reached the specific moment where he becomes the chief
[Amit Varma]: economic advisor. You mentioned you were on holiday in Machu Picchu when you got the phone call
[Amit Varma]: asking if you'd be interested. So kind of take me through the process of what your thinking was
[Amit Varma]: about the job. Should I take this job? What will I achieve? And also your early days in the job
[Amit Varma]: where you described this as quote, the most exciting job in the world, stop quote.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, family, we were all in Machu Picchu taking a family holiday. And in fact,
[Guest]: I got an email from, you know, someone asking whether I'd be interested in the job. And,
[Guest]: of course, you know, this is kind of the dream job for, you know, most economists who are
[Guest]: interested in policy. And if you're, you know, interested in working on your own country,
[Guest]: and remember that, you know, the wonderful thing about India is that, you know, this notion,
[Guest]: this concept of a technocratic policymaker, you know, either working with or in government is not
[Guest]: at all new. I mean, it goes back, you know, decades, you know, even if you go back to the
[Guest]: 60s and 50s, series of, you know, economists who've worked in, for, with government. And so
[Guest]: this was just, and also remember, you know, we spoke about the would be reformers who came to
[Guest]: government in the 70s and 80s. You know, we know the, you know, very illustrious people, you know,
[Guest]: Monte Kalwalia, Shankaracharya, Rakesh Mohan, you know, Vijay Kelkar, you know, so many, and I
[Guest]: should name many, many more. And then, of course, you know, Kaushik, Raghu, all these people. So
[Guest]: it really is, you know, for an economist, you know, if you care about policymaking, so,
[Guest]: so for me, it was not a difficult decision at all to accept. I mean, the only question was how
[Guest]: we'd sort out the, you know, my family was still in the US, son was still, you know, in the last
[Guest]: years of school. So, you know, we had to work that out. And, but so I went to India, I kind of
[Guest]: met a few people, met Mr. Jaitley there. And then, of course, you know, what happened,
[Guest]: I thought I was about to get the job. And then for two months, there was, you know,
[Guest]: there was radio silence from the other end. And of course, you know, apparently some pushback,
[Guest]: and, but finally, you know, it happened. And, and of course, Mr. Jaitley was also had his
[Guest]: operation, then his bariatric surgery, that's also the interregnum. And then, of course,
[Guest]: but when I came, I came with a sense of, you know, this is a dream job in terms of, you know,
[Guest]: all the things that needed to be done and could be done. And I was really a man on a mission with,
[Guest]: you know, thinking about nothing else. And from, you know, what needs to be done, how it needs to
[Guest]: be done, what teams do we need to build? What are the various aspects of policy you want to get
[Guest]: involved in? How to, you know, I did spend a fair amount of my time, you know, thinking about the
[Guest]: Indian Economic Service, and how to, you know, build capacity for them, and, you know, all of
[Guest]: that. So, and then, of course, the public communication part of it, right? I mean,
[Guest]: you know, I had this, you know, maybe a completely misguided, deluded desire that,
[Guest]: you know, everything that one does, should be communicated in a way that kind of raises,
[Guest]: you know, the level of discourse on these issues in India. And that's why, you know,
[Guest]: when you look at the Economic Service, the point was, it must be very rigorous, obviously,
[Guest]: but it must also, you know, it must come alive to people. And I don't know, I don't know,
[Guest]: I guess, the motto for all this, the inspiration was that there's a famous quote by John Maynard
[Guest]: Keynes about what it takes to be an economist, you should read that quote, you know, he must be,
[Guest]: you know, mathematician, economist, he must be, you know, aloof, but he must be in the weeds,
[Guest]: you know, it's like, he must be everything, you know. And that's the sense in which that's the
[Guest]: kind of thing I had that. And, you know, it was very, very fortunate for me that I just had a
[Guest]: a dream boss who, you know, open, constructive, it's not that he agreed with everything that I
[Guest]: said, or not, you know, sometimes completely think, but, you know, you, that open communication,
[Guest]: and, you know, and giving me both the freedom and the protection, actually, both to do this. And,
[Guest]: you know, that's why, you know, I said, I would, I would get involved in everything. And the other,
[Guest]: in terms of the how, I think, what is really critical, it's a point that, you know, Pratap
[Guest]: made in your pieces, I think that when a kind of technocrat comes into policymaking, he should be
[Guest]: given no, I mean, he should not, he or she should not think that just because he has an expertise,
[Guest]: therefore, that kind of exempts him from the nitty gritty of, you know, building teams,
[Guest]: you know, working with people, all down the hierarchy. And, you know, I really did want to,
[Guest]: you know, for example, when I worked on the GST, I used to work with people, you know, under
[Guest]: secretaries, joint secretaries, you know, really, because, you know, they have so much value and
[Guest]: knowledge. And it's not that I'm doing them a favor, they were, you know, doing me a favor,
[Guest]: because they knew. So just this working with as many people as possible in government,
[Guest]: and to do as many things as possible, I was just driven by that. And I really wanted to
[Guest]: do all that I could. And of course, the Economic Surveys provided a forum. And being involved,
[Guest]: I think, in some critical policies, like the GST, you know, also provided. But I did overreach,
[Guest]: you know, I did think that I was no CEO has any business to be involved in. Because I felt that,
[Guest]: you know, at the level of ideas, you could contribute even more than, you know, there's a
[Guest]: part where you have to get into the trenches and do these things. But like in the Keynes quote,
[Guest]: you should also be able to provide, you know, the big ideas around which you can have discussion,
[Guest]: you know, whether they're going to get implemented immediately or not, you know, it's not,
[Guest]: you know, up to you. But, you know, can you provide what I would call, you know, can you
[Guest]: soak the intellectual ecosphere with ideas, then that you know, that others can, you know,
[Guest]: reject or dismiss or accept or whatever. So that's what, you know, it was really an opportunity to do
[Amit Varma]: a lot of things. I enjoyed your Economic Surveys a lot, especially, you know,
[Amit Varma]: especially the fact that in a, you know, you're starting each chapter with a quote from a work
[Amit Varma]: of literature and so on, far more readable than, you know, other such documents that I've read.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting sort of thing that kind of struck me while reading your book and while
[Amit Varma]: reading what else you've written about it, is that I was, if I may say so, filled with
[Amit Varma]: admiration for the man which is you, but ambivalence about the post, because as you've described the
[Amit Varma]: post, your only job, the only job of the Chief Economic Advisor is the Economic Survey.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, it's then up to the man that what can I do, and you pointed out how you went about
[Amit Varma]: it with a sense of humility and team building, and you had been advised, I don't just talk to
[Amit Varma]: the secretaries, talk to the joint secretaries, and you put in that time of effort. And there's
[Amit Varma]: another great quote from you from an interview that you did with Shekhar Gupta, which I'll link
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes where you say, quote, one thing we must try and avoid as economists is to
[Amit Varma]: try and trace a direct link between what you say and what gets done. It's much more complicated and
[Amit Varma]: subtle than that. You feed the ecosphere of ideas and policymaking, and various other forces come
[Amit Varma]: into play, and then decisions are taken. Stop quote. So you pointed out about how one, you're
[Amit Varma]: building a team that has both insiders from the Indian Economic Service as well as outside
[Amit Varma]: consultants, and you're making them kind of work together. Two, you're in touch with all the joint
[Amit Varma]: secretaries and the bureaucrats and so on. Three, it so happens that you have a very good relationship
[Amit Varma]: with the minister, who's your boss, and all of these things are working. But what struck me while
[Amit Varma]: reading all this was that fine, you've, you know, you build these relationships, and therefore you've
[Amit Varma]: had whatever impact you have, some of which might even be diffused and hard to define precisely.
[Amit Varma]: But isn't this something that should be a little more systemic built into the role of the position
[Amit Varma]: itself, rather than just say that, okay, the job of the CEA is to do, you know, the economic survey
[Guest]: every year, and after that, it's all, you know, it's all up in the air. So, Amit, it's something
[Guest]: that I have thought about, right? But can I draw the analogy with kind of, you know, institutions
[Guest]: and politics, right? In all these things that are kind of formal rules, you know, setting of
[Guest]: objectives, you know, even monitoring outcomes, whatever, you have the whole system of formal
[Guest]: things. But then so much of what we know about outcomes are determined by, you know, individuals
[Guest]: and the informal network of relations that you build. So the question is that I just feel that
[Guest]: if that's true, more broadly, it's why should it not be true of, you know, any significant post
[Guest]: in government like that of the CEA. So I think that, you know, I think we have this
[Guest]: slightly exaggerated importance in informal structures and formal rules,
[Guest]: and not enough attention we pay. I mean, that's not to say that maybe you shouldn't define a few
[Guest]: more things, for example, and maybe there is scope for that. But, you know, you know, had I had a
[Guest]: different boss, or, you know, had, you know, my temperament been a little bit different,
[Guest]: you know, regardless of what the formal rules were, you know, the outcomes would have been
[Guest]: very different. So I just feel that there should be both a set of formal, a set of rules, but
[Guest]: a lot more gets, you know, it's like politics as well, you know, there are, you know, politicians
[Guest]: who do well and politicians who don't do well, it's, you know, by dint of their, you know,
[Guest]: personality and so on. So why would that be any different here? So while that's not a thing to
[Guest]: not have some more kind of structure, I mean, but I think there is enough structure to kind of, you
[Guest]: know, give the opportunity to the incumbent to kind of play a helpful role, both inside and
[Amit Varma]: outside government. And, you know, many of us have an impression of the state which comes,
[Amit Varma]: especially for people of my generation from watching Yes Minister and Yes Prime Minister,
[Amit Varma]: where you know, Parkinson's law that the only thing a bureaucrat wants to do is expand their
[Amit Varma]: budgets or their power or whatever. And, but you know, of course, in Yes Minister, your caricature
[Amit Varma]: bureaucrat is deliberately obfuscatory. While whatever I've heard from people who work within
[Amit Varma]: the system in India is that bureaucrats are often incredibly smart, well informed, well meaning,
[Amit Varma]: they want to do the right thing. And yet, it seems sometimes that the system is so creaky
[Amit Varma]: and things happen so kind of at a snail's pace. So, you know, even with the best intentions,
[Amit Varma]: I'm very fascinated to know about sort of your experience in the belly of this beast.
[Guest]: I would say that, you know, I went in and I have come out with an enormous admiration for
[Guest]: all the, you know, most of the, you know, colleagues that I've worked with, you know,
[Guest]: right down the hierarchy from secretaries to, to the lowliest, whatever, I say lowly,
[Guest]: only in a hierarchical, not in a, in any pejorative sense at all. You know, there are
[Guest]: people at the lower end who have so much to contribute as well. And I think my default
[Guest]: mode was, people were helpful, people were constructive, people were, you know, wanting to,
[Guest]: you know, be nice and good. But yet, it is true that, you know, the sum turns out to be
[Guest]: a little bit, this is what you were, I think, implying as well. The sum does turn out to be
[Guest]: a little bit different, you know, than the parts. But, I mean, that being said, I think that
[Guest]: I would not succumb to any kind of cynicism or, you know, negativity about, you know,
[Guest]: the quality of staff and the quality of state capacity within government. I mean,
[Guest]: they're just exceptional people, you know, across the sphere. And, you know, you will get your,
[Guest]: you know, in any institution, you will get your, you know, people on the left tail of the
[Guest]: distribution. And it's not a, but you certainly don't get more of that, say, in the Indian
[Guest]: government. And I would say on the right tail, you get a lot of exceptional people on the right tail
[Guest]: that you can work with. So, you know, so that's why I think that, you know, as certainly as kind
[Guest]: of personal advice or whatever, to work in government is kind of still the, you know,
[Guest]: a high calling, it's a worthwhile calling, and I would urge, and that's why I do believe strongly
[Guest]: that, you know, all the technocratic services like the Indian Economic Service and so on, I think,
[Guest]: you know, we must invest a lot in improving their capacity, their training, and so on,
[Guest]: because I think, ultimately, it matters a lot. Ultimately, you see, just stepping back a little
[Guest]: bit, you know, Amit, you know, I think that there was a view of the world, and I think it's a
[Guest]: legitimate view that, you know, what the state needed to do was not to do certain things. But I
[Guest]: think we've come around to the view, while that's very, very important, I think that, you know,
[Guest]: the state also has to do a lot of good things, you know, and I think this kind of, and I certainly
[Guest]: saw myself, my office, the Indian Economic Service, other parts of government, as very much
[Guest]: part of state capacity. And, you know, when, you know, the, for example, the economic surveys were,
[Guest]: you know, reasonably well read, and, you know, internationally also well read, I felt that,
[Guest]: you know, this was really an effort to show that Indian state capacity could deliver at,
[Guest]: you know, international, you know, levels of, you know, efficiency and standards,
[Guest]: and sometimes maybe even more. And that it's doable, that we have the ability to do that,
[Guest]: it's not because we don't have the talent, or we don't have whatever, you know, or we have,
[Guest]: you know, this image of, you know, the kind of bad bureaucratic state at all. I think that
[Guest]: the Indian state certainly allows opportunities for people to, you know, express themselves and
[Guest]: contribute as much. So I would not at all succumb to any kind of cynicism or negativity on that
[Guest]: score. And it's not just true, you know, you know, my being in CA, I mean, it's been true.
[Guest]: How many technocrats have done such good work in Indian government? I think that's, it's really it,
[Guest]: but it is true. I mean, all that being said, a lot is going to so, so partially answering your
[Guest]: question, then why does the sum turn out to be different? I mean, it's certainly, you know,
[Guest]: the usual, what is the ecosphere of ideas, you know, politics, political compulsions,
[Guest]: interests, and so on, you know, obviously, they're going to have a final say in what gets done. So
[Guest]: that I think that but the input on the part of the technocrats can be as good as needs to be.
[Guest]: And I don't think the system holds that back in any systematic way.
[Amit Varma]: That's what I've heard from all my friends in policy, that there is no shortage of intellectual
[Amit Varma]: capacity, that even in terms of mindsets have gradually changed, which is why it's constantly
[Amit Varma]: kind of baffled me that for so many years, and so many of the different areas like agriculture,
[Amit Varma]: for example, or education or whatever, we know what the solutions are. We've, you know, journalists
[Amit Varma]: have been writing about it for 20-30 years. It's part of the ecosystem, the ecosphere of ideas,
[Amit Varma]: as you say in it, yet nothing seems to get done, which was a mystery to me. And I guess one part
[Amit Varma]: of the mystery could be just politics, like it has always seemed to me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: politics becomes a fatal flaw when you want to carry reform out because the incentives of
[Amit Varma]: politicians, you know, deviate in two significant ways. One is the short termism that they need to
[Amit Varma]: win elections all the time. And therefore, they want to do something which will show results
[Amit Varma]: immediately and not 10-15 years down the line and which is attributable to them. And secondly,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that populist ideas sell that a lot of the ideas, the more complex ideas of economics
[Amit Varma]: like spontaneous order and the positive some nature of voluntary interaction, they're deeply
[Amit Varma]: unintuitive, people don't get it. Well, people very easily get, you know, ideas of welfarism
[Amit Varma]: and handouts and things which sort of coincide with our intuition of the world as a zero sum
[Amit Varma]: game, which of course, it's not. So, you know, how was it for you to then sort of work with
[Amit Varma]: politicians within the system? And did you when you were selling reform to them? Did you have to
[Amit Varma]: add a layer of it, not just a layer of what is the economic benefit, but what is a political benefit?
[Guest]: Absolutely. See, I think that, look, fundamentally, I think, I mean, one way of putting it would be
[Guest]: to say that if you did not believe that good economics was good politics, right, we should
[Guest]: just give up on our thing, right? But the only thing is that you qualify that or you at least
[Guest]: reconcile yourself to the fact that, you know, the horizons over which that might happen might
[Guest]: not be, you know, one election, but you know, whatever. But even within that, I think, you know,
[Guest]: people, you know, I certainly did not subscribe to the views that you give the technical thing,
[Guest]: and, you know, let the politics take over. No, you know, lots of my discussions with, you know,
[Guest]: with the senior politicians would be to say why, you know, good economics is good politics. And,
[Guest]: you know, sometimes, you know, as again, I think the Keynes quote that, you know, you have to be,
[Guest]: you know, behave like a grubby politician, you know, you have to be in the trenches, you have
[Guest]: to use all the arguments that you can, you know, for example, in the case of the of the GST, for
[Guest]: example, you know, I would, you know, say that we need low rates, because, you know, you're a party
[Guest]: that believes in, you know, low taxes, and, you know, lower inflation. So, you know, so, harnessing
[Guest]: those kinds of arguments to make your case, I think, are critical. So I think that, but if
[Guest]: fundamentally good economics is not good politics over various, you know, over a sufficiently long
[Guest]: period of time, then of course, it's a difficult thing. But I do want to come back to one, you
[Guest]: know, so when we talk about the sum and the parts, right, what you said, you know, the supply of
[Guest]: capacity, but the outcome depends upon the demands of the demand side, which is politics, and so on.
[Guest]: So, Shailesh, I think, I don't know whether this came up in your talk on education. So it was very
[Guest]: rewarding, or very heartening in a certain period in Indian politics, when you felt that routine
[Guest]: anti-incumbency gave way to, you know, electoral politics being rewarded by good or bad performance,
[Guest]: rewarded through good and penalized through bad performance. But here's, I think, one of the
[Guest]: biggest, biggest, take the field of education, for example, right? You know, it was the original sin,
[Guest]: we didn't do basic education. But here's a kind of a puzzle of Indian politics that I kind of still
[Guest]: grapple with is, if you have a lot of poor, uneducated kids, why does democratic politics
[Guest]: not make the provision of that an electorally, you know, rewarding exercise? So that's kind of
[Guest]: the demand side that, you know, all of us, you know, we may say, you know, no simplicity in the
[Guest]: GST, but, you know, finally, at least democratic politics should rule. So in the case of education,
[Guest]: you see, and remember, because it's a state subject, or at least whatever,
[Guest]: this is a question that over 70 years, why was it not the case that some state government
[Guest]: somewhere in time, you know, because, you know, it's not that there are, you know, 10% of the
[Guest]: population is uneducated, it's like, you know, massive amounts. So you would think one, but
[Guest]: second, the puzzle gets compounded, because in the post liberalization era, when the private
[Guest]: returns to education went up so much, you know, why didn't people get even more things saying,
[Guest]: look, you know, it's not a social good, it's a private good, my kids will get better jobs,
[Guest]: get higher salaries, because this, why didn't that also, I think, you know, so if that part of the
[Guest]: the puzzle is, in some sense, inadequate or missing, then you will always, you know,
[Guest]: flounder in terms of, you know, the kind of almost the frustration that you feel that
[Guest]: how come outcomes are so disappointing, relative to this, you know, I think that's kind of,
[Guest]: you know, fundamental in democratic politics. And that's why, you know, you know, I'm not a
[Guest]: partisan, I have no party affiliation or anything. But it did seem to be the case that,
[Guest]: you know, the Aam Aadmi Party in its first term, staked its electoral fortunes on health and on
[Guest]: the provision of health and education. That was made it a really interesting thing, because they
[Guest]: were saying, look, crudely speaking, you know, vote for us, because we provide your kids health
[Guest]: and education. So if that, you know, and that's true, not just education, but in other places as
[Guest]: well. So if you're in this system of democratic politics, you always have to, you know, wonder,
[Guest]: or take account of the fact that, you know, if there's a gap between outcomes and capacity,
[Guest]: there is a, you know, that black box of democratic politics, which I think is going to
[Guest]: invariably affect the outcome. And so, you know, cracking that in some sense,
[Guest]: is going to be more as important as just having, you know, smart people in government,
[Amit Varma]: smart technocrats in government. No, no, that's very insightful, what you just said.
[Amit Varma]: But the two halves of what you just said seem to be at cross purposes, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I agree with you that good economics should be sold as good politics for it to get
[Amit Varma]: through. But it doesn't seem to me to be the case that good economics is good politics, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, demonetization was good politics. And I don't think it was good economics. But even apart
[Amit Varma]: from that, I mean, I think it is evident that if good economics was good politics, and given that
[Amit Varma]: politics is a game of supply and demand, you know, we would all be doing well, all policies would be
[Amit Varma]: good, because, you know, politics would see to that, but that seems to be to be not be the same.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder if you have any candidate answers for the question that you pose that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: given that we are so uneducated, and people want it and all of that, still, the state hasn't been
[Amit Varma]: able to, you know, fix a problem, which would, you know, seem to, you know, which is a very powerful
[Amit Varma]: and evocative rhetorical question, because obviously, it's a great moral feeling of the
[Amit Varma]: Indian state that we have failed so miserably in this. But what are sort of your candidate answers
[Amit Varma]: for that? Why is it the case that, you know, the supply hasn't caught up with the demand in terms
[Guest]: of outcomes? I mean, you would have to get into, you know, what are the feelings of Indian democratic
[Guest]: politics more broadly. And I think that, you know, certainly the fact that, you know, you know,
[Guest]: the points that you've said are not unimportant, you know. So I think one point that you made,
[Guest]: I think, is really very important. And I think it's worth emphasizing. It's not so much the
[Guest]: short term thing, but a related, you know, in politics, you know, attribution and getting
[Guest]: credit for what you do, is like, you know, absolutely fundamental to democratic politics.
[Guest]: And I think that, you know, when you think about why did this government choose the public
[Guest]: provision of private goods and services, that's part of the answer. You know, if you produce,
[Guest]: you know, if you say I produce more growth, the link between, you know, the outcome and who was
[Guest]: responsible for that outcome gets, you know, attenuated, as it were. But when you provide the
[Guest]: toilets, when you provide this, all of that, for example, I think that, so the thing with, you know,
[Guest]: with things like health and education, certainly, you know, education, the fact that it's not,
[Guest]: because remember, so the attribution thing which you raised, there are two dimensions to it in
[Guest]: India. One is what we just spoke about, you know, who gets good. The second thing is that that gets
[Guest]: mixed in with federalism. So, for example, you know, if someone at the center wants to do something
[Guest]: that was the prerogative of the states, and, you know, cannot get credit for that, it's going to
[Guest]: be under provided. So, you know, schooling and health are provided by state governments.
[Guest]: And therefore, you know, you want to, you know, not emphasize that because you, you know,
[Guest]: if you just give more resources, and God forbid, it actually succeeds, you know, someone else is
[Guest]: getting the credit for that, and you don't. And that's, and that's why also, if you see, for
[Guest]: example, the health schemes that were started, were schemes that for which the, you know,
[Guest]: attribution could be for, you know, you know, the person at the center providing this. So I think
[Guest]: it's, so for me, that was a new learning experience. It's, you know, we know good economics,
[Guest]: we know the short termism, but how do you satisfy this, you know, and that's intrinsic to politics,
[Guest]: you know, you, you get elected, but in a sense, but but remember that, in a sense, that should
[Guest]: also take away your cynicism, because you know, that if a politician is craving attribution,
[Guest]: then you know, there's, you know, it matters to the, you know, he knows that it matters to the voters
[Guest]: for him to want attribution in the first place. And therefore, you know, it should kind of say that,
[Guest]: well, how can I do things that, you know, that can not only be done, but for which, you know,
[Guest]: attribution can be, you know, appropriated, as it were, so that it also makes good politics,
[Guest]: makes for good politics. So I think these are, I mean, I think this attribution thing is just
[Guest]: so, I mean, that's also why, you know, when leaders kind of want to do schemes, they want
[Guest]: to be associated with them, and, you know, and not with anyone else. You know, so it has a downside,
[Guest]: and it has it, but it can potentially be harnessed. But it's just something that you cannot
[Guest]: ignore about democratic politics, that, you know, so if it were the case that, you know, I guess,
[Guest]: if it were the case that, you know, somehow, you could show within five years that your child,
[Guest]: you know, because of what I did, got actually got a better job and more, more, more earning power,
[Guest]: problem is that can't happen, you know, that there is a so so there is a problem, you know,
[Guest]: attribution cannot be, you know, if there are things that have long gestation lags,
[Guest]: you have to contend with that as well. So it just makes, you know, policymaking more difficult,
[Guest]: but again, not, shouldn't fall prey to, you know, giving up or cynicism. But that's what,
[Guest]: you know, that's what I would strongly feel.
[Amit Varma]: No, that issue of attribution is a fantastic nuance. But it also strikes me that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in some cases, for example, let's take agriculture, right?
[Guest]: I was going to come to agriculture, by the way. But go ahead, but go ahead.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, it is often the case that the demand would be for a policy that is bad economically,
[Amit Varma]: is bad economics and not for something that is good economics. For example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the farmer may not want the removal of MSPs or fertilizer subsidies, but may instead want a
[Amit Varma]: farm loan waiver and often a farm loan waiver is a necessary anesthetic. So I'm not disputing that.
[Amit Varma]: But the really the core structural reforms like the removing the MSP or removing fertilizer
[Amit Varma]: subsidy or power subsidy, for example, which makes Punjab grow so much rice when it has no
[Amit Varma]: business growing rice, for example, those can never happen, because those cannot be sold
[Amit Varma]: politically. And that seems to me to be a clear instance of where, you know, economics and
[Guest]: politics run counter to each other. No, but see, but Amit, okay, let me actually a little bit push
[Guest]: back a little bit, right? So look, the world over, you know, once you give an entitlement,
[Guest]: taking away an entitlement is, you know, it's a universal law of politics that, you know,
[Guest]: it's called the third rail here, you know, whatever, you know, there is something. So I would
[Guest]: not say, therefore, you know, the fact that you can't take away subsidies is, you know, bad politics,
[Guest]: right? So the challenge, therefore, for policymakers and politicians is, in fact, you know, so just to
[Guest]: give a concrete example, you certainly cannot take away fertilizer subsidies on its own in India,
[Guest]: right? But look at the two successes that have happened, right? And so just tells you that the
[Guest]: options are in. One is that supposing you tied the taking away of the subsidy to a universal basic
[Guest]: income. So you linked two reforms in a way that you don't take away an entitlement, you just
[Guest]: replace it with a better, more efficient enlightenment. So that's a way forward for,
[Guest]: you know, thinking about policymaking in creative ways. The other thing, of course, is that remember
[Guest]: how the petroleum subsidy was eliminated in India, it's just very small, but very frequent changes
[Guest]: over time. So that, you know, it is kind of the behavioral economics insight, where you say,
[Guest]: you know, you don't want to impose huge costs, suddenly, the costs are spread out over time.
[Guest]: And then you can, you know, in that case, even without replacing it, you were able to eliminate
[Guest]: a subsidy. So I think there are lots of, you know, ways like that. So I think the other kind of,
[Guest]: you know, behavioral economics thing is that the whole give it up scheme early on, for example,
[Guest]: right, is a kind of way of, you know, can you kind of use name and shame kind of things to,
[Guest]: you know, say, it's like the way I would implement the universe, you know, I had this kind of
[Guest]: fascinating discussion with, with the Telangana chief, Mr. KCR on his, you know, he was the
[Guest]: original scheme, the Raithubandhu scheme, right, that was a kind of, in some ways, India's first,
[Guest]: you know, kind of, kind of, I mean, to be a universal basic income kind of scheme,
[Guest]: not quite, but sort of, and, you know, talking with him about the politics of that is actually
[Guest]: fascinating. So, so if you think about it, right, my preferred thing is not a universal basic income,
[Guest]: but a quasi universal basic income, i.e. don't give it to everyone, give it to everyone, but
[Guest]: someone a few at the top, because, you know, you can make it more affordable, you can make it less
[Guest]: costly. And also the notion that, you know, you know, you know, the big businessman doesn't don't
[Guest]: deserve a 10,000 rupee check, it's kind of ever, right. And also, it may be more, more easier to
[Guest]: implement. But here's where ideas like, you know, don't make it don't make the taking away mandatory,
[Guest]: but kind of make it voluntary, for example. So there are lots of ideas like that, which can,
[Guest]: you know, make, you know, reasonable policymaking, you know, a good policy is feasible,
[Guest]: and not say, you know, take, you know, nowhere in the world, can you take away an entitlement and
[Guest]: say, you know, this is a, you know, and say, so, so I think, you know, again, it's the task of
[Guest]: policymakers and technocrats to kind of internalize this when they talk about policymaking.
[Amit Varma]: Looking back on your time as Chief Economic Advisor, what would you look at, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as your biggest success, maybe not a specific policy, but just a process you put in place or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, what frustrated you the most? And most interestingly, is there something that
[Amit Varma]: you've changed your mind on, you know, during the course of becoming the CEA?
[Guest]: Right, that's a great question. See, I think that, you know, in terms of any one,
[Guest]: you know, any one thing, I think, it'd be difficult to say, because, you know, I guess what,
[Guest]: you know, I would want a kind of people to take away is that, you know, fundamentally,
[Guest]: what we spoke about, that there are things that are doable, you know, across the board,
[Guest]: it's not any one thing, you know, whether it's better advice for policymaking, better analysis,
[Guest]: better communication, you know, so a whole more training, building capacity, working with
[Guest]: youngsters, you know, lots of things are, I think, so it's more, we should have more ambition about
[Guest]: state capacity, in some ways, I think that that's what I would hope, you know, maybe there'll be
[Guest]: people who say no, it shows exactly the opposite, you know, there'll be people who say that as well.
[Guest]: On, you know, I certainly I write in my book that, you know, I think the fertilizer subsidy is,
[Guest]: you know, I worked really hard on that. And, you know, nothing really happened. And,
[Guest]: you know, that, for me, was was kind of a big disappointment, which, of course,
[Guest]: there were other aspects, I mean, the way the kind of GST turned out relative to the original
[Guest]: conception, I think that also was left me, you know, a little bit, but I think hopefully these
[Guest]: are not irretrievable mistakes, I think, I hope they can be rectified. The last question about,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, I have changed my mind on, you know, specific aspects of, you know,
[Guest]: even the whole GST, what we spoke about, you know, the trade off between efficiency and the
[Guest]: loss of fiscal sovereignty. I, you know, I think I have learned that, you know, maybe that trade
[Guest]: off is much more complicated than we originally thought. I think that I think we didn't go into
[Guest]: this, but the whole kind of measurement issue, which, you know, I think is is also something
[Guest]: that I feel, you know, maybe we could have done more on and, you know, although, you know, I did
[Guest]: try to do it in government, that's something that, but I fundamentally come away more feeling that,
[Guest]: you know, a kind of optimism and hopefulness that these are opportunities for doing rather than
[Guest]: the more kind of pessimistic, cynical view that, you know, that actually this experience shows,
[Guest]: you know, so in some ways, my ex ante going into government, as I said, was that, you know,
[Guest]: ex ante, I thought that actually, it would be much more difficult, you know, ability to do things
[Guest]: would be much less. But I come away actually having changed my ex ante perception of this,
[Guest]: and certainly feel that these are all opportunities for where, you know, one should be more
[Guest]: optimistic, you know, proactive, and have the belief that, you know, things can be done well,
[Guest]: and done well, and rather than the others. So there is a change in my ex ante view.
[Guest]: But ex post, I come away thinking that, you know, in that sense, ex post, I feel,
[Guest]: you know, not I have not changed that much about looking back that, you know, you can do a lot.
[Guest]: And so, let's see, I think that's what I kind of come away with. No, in particular regrets,
[Guest]: particular highs, I think there will be but, you know, those are, but fundamentally, I think,
[Guest]: of course, with the with the caveat, always, there's a caveat, and I don't want this,
[Guest]: the caveat always is that all of this is subject to the broader, you know, configuration of
[Guest]: personalities and politics, you know, you know, I don't want to, by any means, discount that. So
[Guest]: that's kind of, I mean, that's a card that, you know, you don't control. So that that you just
[Amit Varma]: work with that. I must confess here that, you know, I'd expected that over this time, you would
[Amit Varma]: have become less hopeful, but it turns out that you're actually more hopeful, which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: should give all of us hope as well, that maybe there is scope for change in the system. I've
[Amit Varma]: taken up a lot of your time. So I'll come to my penultimate question. Now, before I go to my final
[Amit Varma]: question, which is a penultimate question is that and I want this to be a pre COVID question that
[Amit Varma]: before COVID happened in March or in Feb, or whenever, if you were to take stock of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: economy as things are today, and sort of describe what is wrong with it and what the big dangers are
[Amit Varma]: and you know, what are the things that we should be worried about? What would you pick like one
[Amit Varma]: subject that we haven't spoken on at all during this, but you've written so much on is the
[Amit Varma]: financial system, the credit crisis, you know, I was part of this reading group, which was active
[Amit Varma]: last year, which was run by Ajay Shah, and he brought your friend Josh Feldman to it a couple
[Amit Varma]: of times. And Josh used to be, you know, used to scare everyone by talking about how the credit
[Amit Varma]: crisis was such a cancer within the Indian system and was just affecting every other part of the
[Amit Varma]: Indian economy and how disastrous it was. And I get the same sense when I read the things that you
[Amit Varma]: have written that I think that, you know, people who are not familiar with policy and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the actual particulars, don't really understand how bad things really are. So is that your main
[Amit Varma]: concern about the Indian economy? Like, how would you sum up the things that worry you?
[Guest]: You know, again, here, I want to give the answer at two levels, right? One is that,
[Guest]: you know, even the paper that Josh and I wrote in 2019, when we said the economy was in
[Guest]: ICU, this is pre COVID, right? And remember, at that stage, we said that the twin balance
[Guest]: sheet problem had become the four balance sheet problem, because, you know, and by the way,
[Guest]: I have to give, you know, two people entire credit for alerting me to how important one is,
[Guest]: Josh, of course, who from day one has been telling me it's important. And of course,
[Guest]: the work of Ashish Gupta, I think, has been very, very influential in thinking about the
[Guest]: empirical basis for that view. But you know, in late 2019, we said that the twin balance sheet
[Guest]: problem had become the four balance sheet problem, right? And in recent pieces, we've written,
[Guest]: you know, our view is that now, rather than, you know, identifying balance sheets, which have a
[Guest]: problem, it's probably easier to identify those that don't have a problem, because almost every
[Guest]: balance sheet is, is short in India. But here's, I think, a kind of, so I think that's problem
[Guest]: number one, right? But there's a kind of deeper question here. And I think I want to, you know,
[Guest]: raise this, you know, in the last minute is that, you know, why is it that policymakers have not
[Guest]: taken this seriously in India? Because that's the deeper question, you know, you know, all of us can
[Guest]: keep saying, but it's not resonating with the kind of intensity that it should, right? And I have two
[Guest]: kind of tentative solutions for the hypotheses for that. One is that, you know, it's in the nature of
[Guest]: these things that when you have big, disruptive changes, like crises, you have more of a policy
[Guest]: response, when you have a kind of slow bleed kind of situation, which is what this whole financial
[Guest]: crisis has been about. Because remember, we identified the twin balance sheet in 2014. I
[Guest]: think that, you know, that the slow bleed is, by definition, not conducive to, you know, you say,
[Guest]: okay, not 5%, we'll get to 3%, 4%, or maybe 5,000, or whatever. And that lack of that,
[Guest]: by the way, and this is abstracting from the usual, you know, political interest,
[Guest]: commercial interest, you know, crony capitalism, all of that is there. But I want to get to
[Guest]: something, why don't policymakers respond? And I think my second hypothesis for this is that,
[Guest]: look, it's, you know, that India has never had the only major crises it has had are all macroeconomic
[Guest]: and, you know, whatever, you know, 66, we had the food crisis, you know, basically the four Fs,
[Guest]: you know, food, fuel, forex, fiscal, these have been the source of crisis. And usually,
[Guest]: they've been fairly disruptive and sudden and things, and people have responded. So whether
[Guest]: it's 66, or, you know, 91, or, you know, 2013, or now, now big things happen, you want to respond
[Guest]: 1979, 80, as well. This is like a slow bleed, not so big, but we've had no experience of this in
[Guest]: the past. So we have not been kind of, you know, socially kind of inoculated to this kind of, you
[Guest]: know, we don't, it's a bit like, why did the West, you know, not react as quickly to COVID as East
[Guest]: Asia? I mean, remember, as Nietzsche said, that which doesn't kill you makes you stronger. You
[Guest]: know, East Asia was hit by pandemics, you know, serious enough, but which didn't kill, kill them.
[Guest]: So they had this social immunity. Western Europe never saw a pandemic, so it was very strong. So
[Guest]: in that sense, we've never had a history of, you know, financial crises, which have exacted a huge
[Guest]: toll. It is exacting a huge toll, but it's gradual, and it's unprecedented. So I think that's part of
[Guest]: the reason why, you know, the whole policymaking, you know, Josh and I have struggled with this,
[Guest]: that, you know, you know, say, he kept saying, boss, it's a diagnosis problem. It's not a, you
[Guest]: know, and that diagnosis is, you know, elusive, it doesn't really, you know, resonate with people,
[Guest]: you know, never had it before. What is, you know, financial crisis? I know, we'll recapitalize the
[Guest]: banks or, you know, credit, you know, we'll get a bit more growth. So this is like, you know,
[Guest]: a slow bleed and unprecedented, with no kind of social inoculation. And that's kind of explains
[Guest]: part of the reason why I think. So it's a kind of a little bit more conceptual kind of stepping
[Guest]: back answer to yes, we have a massive problem in the financial system. Post COVID, of course,
[Guest]: it's, it's gotten much, much worse. And we have this deeper things. And then, of course, you have
[Guest]: that extra layer that, you know, if in a system, you know, the transparency of the reality is kind
[Guest]: of obscured and hidden and things again, and again, and again, that is another thing that adds
[Guest]: to sort of broader problem of, you know, kind of data transparency that, you know, I've written
[Guest]: about in the context of the GDP and things that I think is kind of like a much deeper system. I
[Guest]: don't know what, you know, Vijay Kelkar and Ajay Shah say about this in their book. But this is
[Guest]: kind of very kind of deep, I think, and you know, unless we can crack that as well. And by the way,
[Guest]: it's true for the GDP, it's true for the financial system, it's true for the fiscal numbers, it's
[Guest]: true for the unemployment numbers, it's true for the consumption numbers, you know, we've got the
[Guest]: situation where kind of kind of basic, you know, kind of the basic ingredients for integrity and
[Guest]: accountability, I know, are kind of eluding us in that sense. And that is kind of very worrying as
[Guest]: well. And that pertains, of course, also. So in a sense, I've answered, I've tried to answer your
[Guest]: questions at three levels, right? Yes, twin has become four. But the deeper reason why we haven't
[Guest]: responded, maybe even a meta reason for that is that the basic, you know, transparency, the
[Guest]: ingredients for transparency, no, but I mean, it could be both supply and it could be all of
[Guest]: course, these are things that, you know, we don't have that, you know, you get the data that you
[Guest]: want to in some ways. So I think there's some of that as well. But, you know, that's kind of my
[Guest]: view on on this, these kind of bigger issues as well.
[Amit Varma]: That's very enlightening. This episode suddenly became much darker, and it's going to get even
[Amit Varma]: darker with my last question. So we'll end it there. Because if I go beyond that, we'll be in
[Amit Varma]: zombie apocalypse territory. But my last question is, is that we are now, you know, in the middle
[Amit Varma]: of this COVID pandemic. And I don't even know if I should say middle, because we don't know how
[Amit Varma]: long this is going to go on. I hope this is not just kind of the beginning. And obviously, this
[Amit Varma]: is like, to everything that was going wrong, this is a force multiplier, it's just a disaster is
[Amit Varma]: probably set us back many years. So sort of looking into the future, let me say that we are in
[Amit Varma]: 2020. If you look at 2030, you know, what's your best case scenario? And what's your worst case
[Amit Varma]: scenario for India, keeping all this in mind, and maybe I should, it's unfair of me to make COVID
[Amit Varma]: part of the question, because it'll, you know, get into the territory of what the philosopher,
[Amit Varma]: you like to quote Donald Rumsfeld calls unknown unknowns. So just sort of leaving COVID out of
[Amit Varma]: leaving COVID out of it, and assuming that it, you know, a vaccine comes along soon, and it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: get too much worse. Assuming that, if you look ahead to 2030, what would you say is our best
[Amit Varma]: case scenario and our worst case scenario? What gives you hope? And what gives you despair,
[Guest]: rather to, you know, to frame it differently? See, when I look back on, you know, the last
[Guest]: two decades, it's kind of a little bit slightly a longer view on the future by, you know, you look
[Guest]: at the past. You know, the truth is that, you know, we've had one decade of, you know,
[Guest]: weak performance, you know, basically, since about 2011, I think we've had weak performance,
[Guest]: and maybe that's what is the message of, you know, Pooja Mehra's book on the last decade,
[Guest]: right. And certainly my own, you know, looking at the numbers and what happened, you know,
[Guest]: it seems like kind of the, so it's been longer, the underperformance and weakening has been much
[Guest]: longer than this. Maybe to add to that little bit pessimism is that, I mean, you could also
[Guest]: make the case that while the weakening has been a decade old, you know, new active positive reforms
[Guest]: are basically stopped in the early 2000s. You know, that's one view. That's also, I think,
[Guest]: the view of some people, even Raghu, I think, has that view. I would kind of dispute that,
[Guest]: I think, at least conceptually, you know, the GST was a major reform, and of course,
[Guest]: it went through. I think the public provision of private goods is something, I think the
[Guest]: bankruptcy did conceptually allow us to address this problem of, you know, decades, decades old
[Guest]: problem of capitalism without exit. But given that they're also faltering, you could say we
[Guest]: have had one decade of, you know, underperformance, and two decades of, you know, not enough policy
[Guest]: reforms. And, you know, and even state capacity has not really been strengthened. So the bad case
[Guest]: scenario is that, you know, this is not, you know, a three or four year old problem is actually a
[Guest]: decade old problem. And therefore, you know, this kind of continues going forward. And of course,
[Guest]: now the starting point is much worse, because COVID has really kind of shot all balance sheets.
[Guest]: And, you know, the world looks completely different post COVID. Now, how do you kind of,
[Guest]: you know, try and, you know, extract some glimmer of hope from this? I guess the glimmer of hope,
[Guest]: you know, actually, potentially, what could be the glimmer of hope, I'm not saying that's what
[Guest]: will happen. You know, this thing has to be rescued from by politics, you know, in India,
[Guest]: this is democratic politics, that if you believe that, you know, if you believe that actually,
[Guest]: our politics is getting again, once again, decoupled from economic performance, which is
[Guest]: what some of the indicators are saying, that's going to add to the sense of thing. But I think
[Guest]: the way to extract something is to say, look, even for this government, it's kind of much more
[Guest]: confident, right, it has more political capital. And, you know, it also has built up some
[Guest]: credentials on this, you know, legitimacy, this provision of public goods, you know, whatever,
[Guest]: you know, that there is a sense in which the new welfarism has worked, I think that agenda
[Guest]: needs to be completed for all of this, you know, the jam, infrastructure, etc, or UBI, whatever,
[Guest]: that thing has to be completed. But in principle, you have the, you know, the political capital
[Guest]: to actually do the things that, you know, need to be done, whether it's IBC, or, you know,
[Guest]: reforms or growth or whatever, or all these things. So I think so that would be one kind of,
[Guest]: you know, possibility that, you know, the conditions are there, but the mindset and the,
[Guest]: you know, the diagnosis has to be right, and then you move forward. The other, of course,
[Guest]: I think the always the perennial glimmer of hope about India is that, you know, it's not one
[Guest]: country, it's a, you know, there are, it's a country of, you know, 27 quasi sovereigns,
[Guest]: or whatever. And then you think that, you know, some of the positive change, even if it doesn't
[Guest]: happen at the centre, will actually, there will be pockets where, you know, good things will be
[Guest]: done, you know, maybe, maybe people will see what ARP has done on health and education. And, you
[Guest]: know, you know, the kind of competitive federalism by way of ideas, kind of spreads in that way as
[Guest]: well. So the potentially good news is that, you know, we have different governments in different
[Guest]: parts of the country, which we now, and, you know, and they embark on a post COVID, you know,
[Guest]: there are, I mean, all of them are in bad trouble. But post COVID, they say, look, you know, for
[Guest]: example, public health, all of us need to be more like Kerala, you know, we learned lessons for that
[Guest]: education, we can take lessons from this. So I think, attracting investment, whatever, you know,
[Guest]: so I think federalism, competitive federalism in India, always is, is hope. See, in the old days,
[Guest]: you know, we used to say about India, it has the wheels of a bullock cart and the brakes of a
[Guest]: brakes of a Rolls Royce, as a kind of, you know, system that always only did incremental things.
[Guest]: But I think that, you know, there's no reason why you could also not have new ideas coming from
[Guest]: different parts of the country. And that kind of drives and motors change, at least in parts,
[Guest]: which then spreads elsewhere. So, you know, so that would be my, you know, trying to,
[Guest]: you know, pick up some glimmer of hope, in what are obviously very, very challenging times.
[Guest]: But it's not just, I mean, I think for me, the real kind of looking back, in fact,
[Guest]: post my CA ship, you know, you look back and say, it's been, you know, one decade of weak
[Guest]: performance, and then another decade, maybe of inadequate reforms. And, and, you know, maybe
[Guest]: we need to think about it in those, you know, terms, even when thinking about what needs to be
[Guest]: done, and whether things can happen going forward.
[Amit Varma]: And maybe one day, we'll have the wheels of a Rolls Royce at the brakes of a bullock cart and
[Amit Varma]: fall right into the river. I've been so enlightened and inspired to have this conversation. Thank you
[Amit Varma]: so much, Erwin, for your time and your insights.
[Guest]: Amit, it's been great to be on the show, wonderful questions. And you know, it's a hallmark of,
[Guest]: you know, a conversation, you know, in terms of how much, you know, I've had to think and how many
[Guest]: new thoughts have been provoked by your questions. So, thank you very much.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.